\input texinfo.tex @c This is -*- Texinfo -*-.

@c This file is part of the Jitter manual.
@c Copyright (C) 2017, 2019, 2020  Luca Saiu
@c Written by Luca Saiu

@c Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
@c document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
@c Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
@c Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and
@c no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the
@c section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License''.


@c File name and title
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@setfilename jitter.info
@include version.texi
@settitle Jitter @value{VERSION}


@c Global settings
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@syncodeindex pg cp
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c As Bruno Haible told me, @documentlanguage is recommended against for
@c English and leaving it out might in fact make builds easier on some
@c older systems:
@c   https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/bug-bison/2019-05/msg00034.html
@c
@c I am leaving this comment mostly as a note for myself, in case I forget
@c about this later and wanted to specify the language in a bout of pedantry.
@c
@c @documentlanguage en   @c No: see above.

@afourpaper
@ignore
@fonttextsize 10
@afivepaper
@smallbook
@c @pagesizes 200mm,100mm
@c @cropmarks
@end ignore

@c This is for production of a nice manual; I might want to enable it
@c when the actual manual is written.  The default (start chapters on
@c pages of any parity) looks less nice.
@c @setchapternewpage odd

@c This come in handy for private testing printouts.
@c @setchapternewpage off

@c I would be tempted to use
@c   @xrefautomaticsectiontitle on
@c to make cross-references appear in the printed manual naming the
@c linked section rather than the anchor.  Still, the bibliography
@c is much more intuitive to link with displayed anchor names.
@c I might change my mind in the future.
@xrefautomaticsectiontitle on

@c Information for the Info directory
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@dircategory Programming
@direntry
* The Jitter manual: (jitter).        Generating efficient language virtual machines.
* jitter: (jitter).                   Invoking @command{jitter}.
* @command{jitter-config}: (jitter).  Invoking @command{jitter-config}.
@end direntry


@c Macros
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@iftex
@macro epsilonsubscript{subscript}
@inlineraw{tex,$@varepsilon_{\subscript\}$}@inlineraw{tex,{}}
@end macro
@end iftex

@ifnottex
@ifhtml
@macro epsilonsubscript{subscript}
@inlineraw{html,&epsilon;<sub>\subscript\</sub>}
@end macro
@end ifhtml
@ifnothtml
@macro epsilonsubscript{subscript}
epsilon\subscript\
@end macro
@end ifnothtml
@end ifnottex

@macro epsilonzero{}
@epsilonsubscript{0}
@end macro

@macro epsilonone{}
@epsilonsubscript{1}
@end macro

@rmacro fixme{text}
@strong{[@emph{FIXME}: \text\]}
@end rmacro

@rmacro rephrase{text}
@strong{[@emph{REPHRASE}: \text\]}
@end rmacro

@c Bibliography macros
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@ignore
I am not really satisfied with this.  There should
be a nice way to insert a link to the bibliography,
usable in the PDF version, without having a page
number in the printed document.
@end ignore
@iftex
@rmacro bibanchor{bibliographyanchor}
[\bibliographyanchor\]
@end rmacro
@rmacro bibref{bibliographyanchor}
@cite{[\bibliographyanchor\]}
@end rmacro
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@rmacro bibanchor{bibliographyanchor}
@anchor{[\bibliographyanchor\]}
[\bibliographyanchor\]:
@end rmacro
@rmacro bibref{bibliographyanchor}
@ref{[\bibliographyanchor\]}
@end rmacro
@end ifnottex

@ifnothtml
@macro bibbegin{bibliographyanchor}
@multitable @columnfractions .17 .83
@item @bibanchor{\bibliographyanchor\}
@tab
@indentedblock
@end macro
@end ifnothtml

@ifhtml
@macro bibbegin{bibliographyanchor}
@multitable @columnfractions .15 .85
@item @bibanchor{\bibliographyanchor\}
@tab
@end macro
@end ifhtml

@ifnothtml
@macro bibend
@end indentedblock
@end multitable
@end macro
@end ifnothtml

@ifhtml
@macro bibend
@end multitable
@end macro
@end ifhtml

@rmacro bibentry{bibliographyanchor,body}
@multitable @columnfractions .15 .85
@item @bibanchor{\bibliographyanchor\}
@tab
\body\
@end multitable
@end rmacro

@macro doi{doi}
Available at @url{http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=\doi\}.
@end macro


@c Copying conditions
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@copying
This is the manual for Jitter
@c (edition @value{EDITION} for
(version @value{VERSION},
last updated on @value{UPDATED}), an efficient virtual machine generator.

Copyright @copyright{} 2017, 2019, 2020  Luca Saiu.  Written by Luca Saiu.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
@c FIXME[licensetext]: enable this if I decide to embed the license in the text.
@c with the Invariant Sections being ``GNU General Public License'' and
@c ``GNU Free Documentation License'',
with no Front-Cover texts and with the Back-Cover text being
``@emph{You have freedom to copy and modify this manual, like GNU
software.}''.

@c FIXME[licensetext]: enable this if I decide to embed the license in the text.
@c A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free
@c Documentation License''.
A copy of the GNU Free Documentation License is available along with the
software source code as @file{doc/COPYING.DOC}, and also on the web at
@url{https://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html}.
@end quotation

@c @c FIXME[contactingme] Isn't this silly?  My contact information is on the cover.
@c The author's personal web site at @url{http://ageinghacker.net} contains
@c his contact information.
@end copying


@c Title page
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@titlepage
@title Jitter
@subtitle a generator of efficient language virtual machines
@subtitle for version @value{VERSION}, updated in @value{UPDATED-MONTH}
@c @author Luca Saiu (@email{positron@@gnu.org}, @url{http://ageinghacker.net})
@c @author Luca Saiu (@url{http://ageinghacker.net})
@c @author Luca Saiu (@email{positron@@gnu.org})
@author Luca Saiu
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage


@c Contents (only actually used for the hardcopy version)
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@contents


@c First page for the Info version, with the main menu
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Jitter

@c An @insertcopying within the Top node is not explicitly mandated by
@c the GNU Standards, nor even suggested in the Texinfo documentation;
@c however without such a line the Info and HTML versions don't bear any
@c copying information near the beginning.  Notice that the very short
@c introduction about what the software is comes from @copying.
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
@c What this software is and how it came to be
* Introduction::               What Jitter is and why it is useful.
@c Part I@* Tutorial documentation
* Working with the Jitter sources::  How to configure, build and test Jitter, natively or cross-compiling.
* Tutorial::                   A simple but realistic example explained in detail.
@c Part II@* Reference documentation
* Invoking @command{jitter}::            Generating C files with Jitter from the command line.
* Standalone VMs::             Using a generated VM as a self-contained program.
* Compiling Jittery programs:: How to build executable from VMs and your code.
* Writing VM specifications::  How to describe your virtual machine's behavior.
* C API::                      Calling C code from your VM and your VM from C.
* Data representation and tagging:: It is reasonable to encode VM data differently from C data.
* Garbage collection::         Jitter includes a garbage collector usable from VMs.
@c Part III@* Performance
* Writing code generators::    Tips about implementing compilers for your VM.
* Internals::                  How the generated virtual machines work.
@c Licenses
@c * GNU General Public License::     How you can share and modify the software.
@c * GNU Free Documentation License:: How you can share and modify this manual.
* This is free software::      How you can share and change the software and this manual.
@c Bibliography
* Bibliography::               Interesting scientific articles about efficient VMs.
@c Indices
* Index::                      The key words of this manual, with links.
@c Temporary stuff, for myself
* Stuff still to be written:: What will be in this manual but is not fully written yet.
* Stuff still to be implemented:: What will exist in the implementation in the future.
@end menu


@c Introduction
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@node Introduction
@unnumbered Introduction

@c The introduction is written in the first person singular, and uses
@c a more informal tone than the rest.  The clear fracture in style
@c from the introduction to the first chapter is intentional, meant to
@c convey first a more personal, vaguely sentimental touch, and then
@c the reliable terseness of comprehensive documentation.  This
@c distinction should be kept.

@cindex specification
@cindex portability
@cindex high-level
@cindex specification
@cindex overhead, dispatching (zero)
@cindex dispatching overhead (zero)
@cindex zero, dispatching overhead
Jitter is a software automatically building a portable, very
efficient language virtual machine with performance close to
native code, starting from a relatively high-level
@dfn{specification} provided by the user.
@cindex register, VM
@cindex stack, VM
@cindex runtime data structure, state
@cindex state, runtime data structure
@cindex data structure (state)
The VM state may include registers, stacks or a combination of both
along with any runtime structure defined by user code; whenever
possible the generator attempts to map such state data structures
into hardware machine registers.
@cindex C
@cindex API
The specification contains some C code associated to every VM
instruction; the generator takes care of combining such small blocks
of C into a whole body of code with low---usually zero---dispatching and
branching overhead.
The generated code includes a simple C API to dynamically emit and
execute VM code, and a self-contained driver program for running VM
routines from text files.

@cindex dispatch
@cindex assembly code
@cindex VM independence
@cindex architecture-specific assembly
@cindex conditional compilation
The generated C code is heavily conditionalized and can be configured
to run using different dispatching techniques, of varying
sophistication; the most efficient dispatching techniques rely on some
architecture-specific---but @emph{not} VM-specific---assembly support
already included in this software; every dispatching model but one
also relies on GNU C extensions.
@cindex @code{switch} dispatching
@cindex ANSI C
@cindex C, ANSI
As a fallback case, in the interest of portability, one dispatching
technique is provided, @dfn{@code{switch} dispatching}, requiring nothing
more than standard C.
@*
Configuration parameters are transparent with respect to the VM
semantics and even the C API: a VM routine will always behave in the
same way independently from the dispatching technique and other
configuration parameters, the only observable difference being
execution speed.

@cindex JIT
As long as they are willing to respect the license most free software
maintainers whose projects include an interpreter of some kind should
seriously consider replacing their execution engine with a VM
generated by this software.
@c FIXME: first person singular.  Say ``jittery'' here?
@cindex Jittery
A @dfn{Jittery VM} will easily surpass any interpreter in performance
and should even be competitive against JITs, with the sources being
much easier to maintain and portability coming for free.

@menu
* Audience::                           Who this software was written for.
* History::                            How Jitter came to be.
* About language virtual machines::    Language VMs are not always the right idea.
* Software and hardware requirements:: Some systems are better than others for VMs.
* Design goals::                       What Jitter is trying to achieve.
* Comparison with other systems::      Jitter compared to what other people are doing.
* License::                            We should use the GNU GPL more.
* Contacting the author::              You can discuss with me about Jitter.
@end menu

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Audience
@section Audience
@cindex audience
@cindex assembly code
@cindex C
@cindex programming, low-level
@cindex low-level programming
Jitter is designed to generate production-quality language virtual
machines, with a strong emphasis on performance.  Despite some effort
to keep the discussion accessible I cannot in good conscience present
the software or its documentation as suitable to beginning
programmers.  Taking full advantage of Jitter requires proficiency
with the C language, at least some understanding of assembly and
an intuitive idea
@cindex micro-architecture
about the performance model of native code running on modern CPU
micro-architectures, particularly with respect to
@cindex latency, instruction
@cindex instruction latency
@cindex bandwidth, instruction
@cindex instruction bandwidth
@cindex out-of-order
@cindex branch target prediction
@cindex prediction, branch target
@cindex target, branch prediction
@cindex cache
instruction bandwidth and latency, out-of-order execution, branch
target prediction and cache effects.

@cindex portability
@cindex VMs for portability
@cindex assembly code
That said, everybody is welcome to try.
With the caveat in @ref{About language virtual machines},
beginning compiler writers
might use a generated virtual machine instead of native
assembly as a portability layer, even without mastering every
intricacy of the implementation.


@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node History
@section History
@cindex history
@cindex epsilon
@cindex GNU epsilon
@cindex @epsilonzero{}
GNU epsilon (@pxref{Top,,, epsilon, The GNU epsilon Manual}) is a
programming language and my own main project, still to be officially
released as ``stable'', built on an extremely simple core language
called @epsilonzero{} and augmented with powerful syntactic
abstraction.  I have been working on epsilon for many years, rewriting
it from scratch at least five times in a strenuous effort to make it
``right''.  Even if many details of the implementation can still use
more than some fine tuning, I believe that at least its general
architecture is now correct.

@cindex @epsilonzero{}
@cindex standard C
@cindex ANSI C
@cindex C, standard
@cindex C, GNU
@cindex GNU C
epsilon is a general-purpose language, combining very low-level
control (ideally at a level finer than GNU C; certainly finer than
standard C) with high-level features allowing the user to express and
combine complex syntactic forms.  Ultimately every piece of epsilon
code, no matter how complicated, gets rewritten into @epsilonzero{}
before execution or compilation.  Interpreting @epsilonzero{}
is easy, but very inefficient.

@cindex @epsilonzero{}
@cindex self-modification
Even worse epsilon is written in itself: execution begins from a crude
``bootstrap'' @epsilonzero{} interpreter running through the
definitions of every high-level form, as macros and expression
rewrites, which eventually make the language usable by humans.  This
idea of incremental definition relies on an epsilon program modifying
itself in the style currently popular in the ``dynamic language''
community: global procedure, macro and variable definitions are added or
replaced @emph{at run time}, in a way challenging the traditional idea
of compilation.  On the other hand, and differently from what happens with
the fashionable ``scripting languages'', epsilon programs usually
reach a point in their execution after which they stop self-modifying
and become suitable for traditional, efficient compilation to machine
language.  This final compilation of non-self-modifying programs after
they are automatically rewritten into @epsilonzero{} is,
unsurprisingly, easier than in other languages; but executing a
program while still in its ``dynamic'' form has always been
frustratingly slow.
@cindex embarrassing pause (interpretation, not GC)
@cindex pause, embarrassing (interpretation, not GC)
@cindex performance tuning, epsilon
@cindex tuning, epsilon
@cindex epsilon
@cindex GNU epsilon
Bootstrapping takes minutes even on a fast machine
and interactive use, if not properly painful, lacks the expected
smooth @emph{feel}, the occasional ``embarrassing pause'' at the end
of a complex macro invokation reminding the user every time that the
implementation has not been tuned quite in the right way.
@ignore
FIXME: this specific ergonomy problem may lie in the uneven time
distribution rather than in the amount of delays: uniformly slow
interactive language implementations, such as CPython, @emph{feel}
better.
@end ignore

@cindex direct threading
@cindex AST
@cindex abstract syntax tree
@cindex git
@cindex stack
Attempting to accelerate @epsilonzero{} interpretation I quickly
put together a stack-based direct-threaded interpreter, with the
intention of using it in place of the current abstract-syntax-tree
interpreter.  That implementation still lives on a git branch but I
will not integrate it in the mainline: at only 4-6x its speedup was
disappointing.

@cindex dependency, from epsilon (none)
@cindex patch-in
@cindex specialization
In order to experiment with fast interpreters I started a new
threaded-code prototype independent from epsilon.  Very soon I had the
idea of @dfn{specialization} (@pxref{specialization}), one of the
few true innovations in this project along with patch-ins
(@pxref{patch-ins}), despite its
simplicity; the results were promising, but again the simple
combination of direct threading and specialization was not enough to
achieve the speedup I was expecting.  I found myself reading and
re-reading scientific papers (@pxref{Bibliography}), and adding more
sophisticated ideas to my prototype to the point where it is now
debatable whether the software still counts as an @emph{interpreter}
generator.
@*
Some ideas definitely belong more in JITs than in threaded
interpreters, and in fact the most advanced dispatching model
supported by Jitter requires no threaded code to be processed at run time,
nor indeed any data structure representing routine code other than an array
of native machine instructions in executable memory---``interpreting''
a routine means jumping to its first native instruction, from where
execution continues.
@c FIXME: justify the name here?

Soon enough what I had planned as just a fun hack for a few
weekends turned into something ambitious and useful for others,
independent from epsilon which will now require it, but @emph{without
being required itself} for compiling or running Jitter.


@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node About language virtual machines
@section About language virtual machines
@cindex managed (not)
@cindex unmanaged
@cindex fashion
@cindex irrationality
@cindex cultural inertia
@cindex inertia, cultural
Language virtual machines are fashionable: people like to compile to
VMs for portability, and to reuse the same VM as a target for several
different languages, forcing VM specifications on one hand to maintain
backward compatibility, and on the other to provide some level of
generality.

The VM-runtime design nowadays has gotten so pervasive to be almost
the expected default, to the point that the word ``unmanaged'' was
coined to describe a language runtime @emph{not} depending on a
virtual machine, as if directly generating physical machine
instructions were some kind of oddity requiring justification.

I disapprove of this trend.

@menu
* When not to use VMs::  For portability, computers as thin clients, fashion.
* When to use VMs::      Truly dynamic code, doing better than interpreters.
@end menu

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node When not to use VMs
@subsection When @emph{not} to use VMs

@cindex portability
@cindex porting
@cindex VMs for portability
First of all the idea of compiling to a VM for portability relies on
the presence of some runtime system, usually very large and either
written in a low-level language, therefore simply shifting the
portability problem, or mostly built on the VM language itself making
programs less efficient than it would be otherwise possible,
particularly at startup.
@*
@cindex portability
@cindex porting
@cindex VMs for portability
@cindex JIT
Moreover most languages need some form of compilation to machine code
to attain an acceptable level of performance.  JITs are now part of
every language VM at least attempting to obtain good performance, but
again they are not trivial to port, and nowadays most JITs will target
just the one or two most popular hardware architectures.
@*
@cindex portability
@cindex rationalization
@cindex C
@cindex Autoconf
@cindex Automake
@cindex GNU Autoconf
@cindex Gnulib
I have grown skeptical of claims about language VMs as a solution for
portability: if that were really the main concern then simply using C
plus some reasonable tool for handling the occasional system oddity
(GNU Autoconf and Gnulib come to mind) would provide for even better
portability, and without compromises on performance.

@cindex JVM
@cindex bytecode verification
@cindex verification, bytecode
@cindex safety
@cindex sandboxing
A few VMs also provide features unrelated to portability, particularly
sandboxing or some safety checking of programs at startup.  Ideas such as
the JVM's ``bytecode verification'', while scientifically interesting,
are a mismatch for most use cases and should never get in the way of
running compiled code efficiently.

@cindex coupling (lack thereof)
@cindex decoupling
@cindex API, public (VMs)
@cindex VM as a stable API
@cindex back-compatibility
@cindex stable, VM specification
@cindex JVM
Exposing a VM as a software API decoupled from a compiler is a source
of inefficiency when independent projects with different needs
target the same VM, or even when a single compiler needs to evolve
but at the same time needs to retain compatibility with older
versions of a VM satisfying a given specification; the impossibility
of implementing efficient method tail calls in the JVM depends on such
a case of excessive decoupling---and in some measure, I dare to say,
on a community of programmers in general too conditioned by cultural
inertia and irrational fashions to appreciate the benefit of a clean
break.
@*
@cindex Java
@cindex JVM
@cindex mismatch, performance profile
@cindex fitness (non-), performance profile
@cindex performance profile mismatch
@fixme{weaken: the typical use case of java may have changed}
Speaking of Java, the entire performance profile of the JVM stands out
as a @emph{spectacularly} poor fit for server-side web programming, the most
popular use case for the language: processes are spawned often, live
for a short time, compute very little and only consist in running local,
statically compiled bytecode on one physical machine with a known architecture;
bytecode is hardly ever exchanged over the network or generated at run time.

@cindex Java
@cindex JavaScript
@cindex JIT
If Java is one case of incorrect application of VMs its example is
not the only one, nor the worst.  Soon after web browsers started to
include good JITs for JavaScript---an accomplishment in itself for a
language so difficult to execute efficiently---people started to use
JavaScript as a compilation target for @emph{lower}-level languages,
usually restricting the generated
code to the JavaScript subset that current web browsers can JIT-compile
well.  What would have been an entertaining hack turned
into a grotesque perversion of huge machine-generated code with mediocre
performance, and very troubling political implications:
@cindex Nineteen eighty-four
@cindex 1984
@cindex Orwell, George
@cindex George Orwell
@cindex surveillance
@cindex privacy
@cindex network
@cindex political implications of web applications
@cindex web applications, political implications
@cindex bloat
@cindex abstraction inversion
distributing important software as generated JavaScript code to run on
a web browser over the network prevents its users from easily changing
the source, introduces gratuitous dependencies on the network when
none would be needed, and potentially exposes user data to the server
or to eavesdroppers.
@*
@cindex C
@cindex Doom
@cindex JavaScript
@cindex 486
@cindex i486
@cindex 1993
On the technical side some of these projects are very impressive: I
have seen the old Doom game run on a web browser at amazing speed, the
frame rate on my new computer almost approaching what my 486 could
do in 1993.
@cindex C
@cindex JavaScript
@cindex overhead
@cindex multiplication, of overheads
This is not sarcasm: the technical achievement @emph{is} objectively
impressive; the route from hand-written C code machine-translated
to JavaScript, then after the network transfer loaded onto my client,
turned into some intermediate representation and from there to native
machine language running in a sandboxed environment, is not trivial by
any mean.
Considering that by stacking abstraction layers one on top of
another their overheads @emph{multiply}, this result is good;
and I am sure that there exist problem instances where this composed
multiple machine-translation works even move efficiently.
Whether such an organization makes sense, of course, is an entirely
different matter.

@cindex C
@cindex Lua
@cindex JavaScript
This is not all.  I have seen @emph{interpreters} for high-level
scripting languages, originally written in C and already quite
inefficient when natively compiled, machine-translated into JavaScript
to be run over a JIT in a client web browser, in order to interpret
script code downloaded from the web.
The performance impact is @emph{not} invisible, and the supposed advantage
questionable at best:
being able to run page scripts in some other (very similar) language rather
than JavaScript, or running programs without having an interpreter
installed---because in 2021 the voice of the crowd says that people who run
software and just @emph{compute on their computers} are no longer hip.

@cindex craziness
This craziness must stop.

@cindex social conscience
@cindex dumbing down
@cindex empowering users
@cindex fashion
@cindex bad practice
@cindex abstraction layer, redundancy of
@cindex redundant abstraction layer
As competent programmers with a social conscience it is our duty to
oppose and reverse the dumbing down of software, to empower users
again, to make software architectures more rational and, where possible,
simpler; I believe that this entails, as a first step, moving
applications away from the web and back to local computers directly
controlled by the users.
Redundant abstraction layers must all be stripped away, mercilessly.
@*
@cindex bad practice
Without the illusion of changing irrational minds with rational
arguments we should keep proposing alternative solutions; performance
can be one advantage to present, as long as we use VMs
@emph{sensibly}.  The current popularity of laughably bad practices in
the field might make our job easier and unfold into a competitive
advantage for our side.

@ignore
about the web: sum up the (very sensible, non-technical) objection by
RMS to my proposals of destroying it all for technical reasons.
@end ignore

@ignore
End users expect more and more to deal only with the web, relying on
remote services to perform even trivial computations without even the
thought of using their own computer to compute.  The interfaces they
are exposed to are all too weak, and allow hardly any composition and
no abstraction: the idea of a Unix pipe is difficult to visualize for
somebody only accustomed to web interfaces; a shell function feels
hopelessly abstract, like something only useful to experts occupied in
weird tasks well out of the domain of ordinary people.
@end ignore


@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node When to use VMs
@subsection When to use VMs

@cindex native machine language
@cindex machine language
@cindex performance
Even very complex programs run best when they are encoded in the
language spoken by the hardware, which is native machine language.
Only in favorable cases and with enormous effort some VMs may approach
the same level of performance.
@*
Providing some form of JIT compilation is nowadays considered more
or less a requirement for a language VM; still, supporting a JIT is
necessary but almost certainly not sufficient to rival native performance.

@cindex alternative to compilers
@cindex alternative to interpreters
@cindex regular expression
@cindex self-modifying code
The correct way of employing language VMs is not as an alternative to
compilers, but @emph{as an alternative to interpreters}.  A few cases
come to mind: programs which are subject to modify themselves often at
run time, and lightweight utilities where code generation is necessary
but complex compiler optimizations are too costly to pay off with
respect to the program expected run time---regular expression matchers
being an example.
A program should employ a VM only for the dynamically generated part of
the code, compiling the rest to machine code ahead of time.  This
yields better performance and allows access to better tools for
developing and debugging the bulk of the program.

@cindex alternative to compilers
@cindex second-tier performance
@cindex ML implementation performance
@cindex Lisp implementation performance
@cindex assembly code
@cindex architecture-specific assembly
Adopting a VM as a compiler target instead of a full-fledged assembly
backend might be a practical stopgap solution in some circumstances, but
it is unrealistic in such cases to expect spectacular results:
compiling to a fast VM will yield, in the best case, second-tier
performance in the range of good ML or Lisp implementations---Usually
simple, sensible systems written in a competent way, but without any
concrete ambition of competing in speed with low-level designs.

@cindex untyped
@cindex dynamically typed
@cindex tuning, of VMs
@cindex variable name
@cindex register
@cindex stack slot
@cindex static chain
@cindex register window
@cindex SPARC
The details of course will depend on the VM language, and the established
practice we are competing against.
A VM for an @emph{untyped} system will probably beat even a more
sophisticated VM for a dynamically-typed language where every primitive
operation requires run-time type checks.
Intelligent VM designs will win against naïve versions: if any
conditional can be moved from run time to VM code generation the
resulting speedup is almost always worth the trouble: translating
variable names into register numbers, stack slot indices or static
chain distances is a good idea, and simpler systems performing
run-time searches on variable names will be easily outperformed.
@ignore
FIXME: Compute some numbers and compare against pypy and luajit
@end ignore
@fixme{People just don't care, not playing the same game: scripting languages.
We can beat even their JITs if we use untyped runtimes.}
@fixme{is the intent of what I'm saying clear?  I want to say that
naïf systems will be beaten by less naïf systems, but the opponents'
naïveté should not be an excuse for making our systems inefficient.
No, I don't think it's clear: I should say this.}


@cindex decoupling
As stated above in my discussion of decoupling it is important
that a VM be specifically designed for the system it supports, to execute its
code in the most efficient possible way; for this reason the VM
language should ideally not be an API to be published as stable and set
in stone, but should rather be subject to change in any future version of the
software, to allow for performance tuning.  Many details will depend on the
language being interpreted, and the performance tradeoff of some
choices may not be obvious; for example parameter passing in a VM can
employ registers, stacks, or SPARC-style register windows; it is
entirely reasonable that a software author may want to switch from one
solution to another in a new release, or even as a configuration-time
decision based on hardware machine features.

@ignore
Even if the feature would be easy to add, right now Jitter does not
support any efficient format to save and load VM routines: the user is
supposed to generate VM routines programmatically, the exact VM
instruction set being subject to change from version to version.
Facilities for parsing, printing to text and disassembling VM routines
@emph{are} provided, but more as debugging aids than to support a VM
as a ``stable'' target.
@end ignore

@* @c Do not change whitespace before or after this.
@cindex reuse, VM
@cindex VM reuse
@cindex threaded code
@cindex replication
@cindex assembly code
@cindex architecture-specific assembly
The paragraph above holds as an argument against the reuse of
@emph{entire} language virtual machines.  Still some of the code involved
in VMs, at a different level, can and should be reused.
@*
Even if writing a threaded virtual machine is easy, doing it with
attention to efficiency requires some effort.  The idea of
replication, which I have come to regard as essential, entails in
practice automatic code generation techniques which, if conceptually
simple, take time to implement.  The patch-ins infrastructure, if
again intuitive to understand, is laborious to implement
and requires very subtle mechanisms
(@pxref{Defective VM instructions}) to guarantee correctness in
every case.
Several features, technically
optional but very beneficial for performance, rely on a small amount
of hand-written assembly code.  Interestingly such code is specific to the
architecture but completely independent from the VM.  All these
reasons make @emph{the VM construction infrastructure}, rather than VMs,
worth sharing.
@*
Jitter is a solution for such reuse.


@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Software and hardware requirements
@section Software and hardware requirements

@cindex requirements, software
@fixme{Anything non-GNU is secondary; some effort will be made to run
with just a standard ANSI C compiler supporting only the simplest
dispatching models, as long as the supported C standard is recent.
There is no support yet, but I'd like a Jittery system to run on the
metal, in kernel mode if there are protection rings.}

@cindex requirements, hardware
@fixme{What machines are ``small''.
8-bit machines are too small.  16-bit machines might do, as long as their
address space is wider than 16 bits.
RAM is the issue.  8MB should be enough for good performance, and less
might still be workable; 32MB is plenty.
Some very small machines might still have enough RAM to host a Jittery
system using threaded code, as long as some modification is made to
the runtime not to unconditionally rely on @code{mmap}; contact me if
you want to work in this direction.}

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Design goals
@section Design goals
@cindex goals, design
@cindex design goals

@fixme{this should be short}

@menu
* Performance::                                    Jittery VMs must be fast.
* Generality::                                     Sensible VMs should be implementable.
* Minimizing and factoring machine dependencies::  Jitter lets you abstract over CPUs.
* Expressivity and convenience::                   Ease of use is a minor goal.
* Non-goals::                                      Some features are just bad.
@end menu

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Performance
@subsection Performance
@fixme{Realistically, a Jittery system will not be the fastest
possible; a static system compiled with GCC will always win.  But I
can certainly aim at a different optimum: Jittery programs can be much
more expressive.  Jittery code will not be faster than native code,
but it can be usually within a factor of 2 and almost always within a
factor of 5, with Jitter being 1,000 times smaller than GCC, and
code generation immensely cheaper.}

@fixme{@xref{The price in performance}}

@fixme{@xref{Performance tips}}

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Generality
@subsection Generality
@fixme{sensible VM designs should be implemented.  And even the
non-sensible ones I dislike.  Experimenting should be easy}

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Minimizing and factoring machine dependencies
@subsection Minimizing and factoring machine dependencies
@cindex portability, hardware
@cindex architecture
Jitter already supports several CPU architectures:
@pxref{Architecture-specific notes}.

@cindex GCC
@cindex dispatching model
@cindex minimal threading
@cindex direct threading
@cindex icache
@cindex dcache
@cindex cache, instruction
@cindex cache, data
@cindex flush, data cache
@cindex invalidate, instruction cache
@cindex @code{__builtin___clear_cache}
For not explicitly supported machines direct-threaded code is always
available as a fallback option, which is as portable as GCC; even
minimal-threading dispatching might work with no explicit porting effort
where @code{mmap} is available and GCC's
@code{__builtin___clear_cache} suffices to invalidate an icache range
along with any necessary dcache flush.

@cindex switch dispatching
@cindex C compiler
@cindex ANSI C compiler
In the unlucky and mostly theoretical case that GCC support were not
available for a CPU the user can always revert to @code{switch}
dispatching, which is supposed to rely only on an ANSI C compiler.
@fixme{Can I run at least minimal-threading dispatch with GCC on a
non-GNU platform?  I think so; I should test on some free software BSD
system [Answer: I can, as long as there is an @code{mmap}.  This
should include BSDs and exclude Wine, but I guess Cygwin would
work---not that I care.  @fixme{Make the availability of advanced
threading models dependent on @code{mmap} in @file{configure.ac}.}]}

@*
@cindex API, Jitter
@cindex dispatching model
While dispatching models differ in performance, they are all functionally
identical and controlled by the same API.

@cindex porting
@cindex register
Jitter is trivial to port to register-based CPU architectures allowing for
a sufficiently wide addressing space: @pxref{Porting}.

@fixme{The kind of architecture-dependent code factoring described
here has little to do with using VMs for portability: the point here
is using VMs for expressivity and having the generated VM run easily
on many platforms, as the machine-dependent code is factored within
Jitter.  If anything, this is about portability @emph{at a meta
level}, in the interest of the VM implementor rather than the user.
Anyway if people want to use a Jittery VM as a portability layer,
against my recommendations, they can.}

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Expressivity and convenience
@subsection Expressivity and convenience
The ease of use of a VM is a secondary goal compared to its
performance, but working on Jitter convinced me that, luckily, a
convenient C API and intuitive debugging tools are at the very least
@emph{not incompatible} with the need for fast execution on a wide
range of CPUs.

@anchor{compiling-expressions}
Right now a program relying on a Jittery VM has to generate (unspecialized) VM
instructions explicitly, in particular taking care or register allocation
for register-based VMs.  A Jittery VM right now is probably easier to
use than a simple JIT requiring the same explicit register handling by
the user, but less convenient than JITs which accept high-level
expressions.  @fixme{but @pxref{Writing code generators}}

@fixme{Some optional facility for compiling higher-level code
involving expressions (with jumps) can be added to Jitter in the
future; the fact that the VM details are specified by the user makes
an automatic mapping from high-level to low-level code more difficult,
but I think these problems can be solved.}

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Non-goals
@subsection Non-goals
@cindex design non-goal
@cindex design goal, non-
@cindex goal, non- (design)

@fixme{code size.  Particularly residual argument packing.  Even if I might play with
indirect threading in the future, for fun}

@fixme{object orientation: absolutely no, never in one million years.
I don't believe in it and I never use it; you can build OO
functionalities with a Jittery VM, but OO should not be a fundamental
mechanism embedded in all data.  Procedures are immensely more
important than methods. @fixme{but @pxref{Late binding}}}

@fixme{closures, function objects.  I don't dislike those, but again
they are not fundamental and can be implemented on top of other
control primitives.  Non-closing procedures are in practice more
important than closures.}

@fixme{type tagging for all data: absolutely not.  That is a recipe
for destroying performance.  It can be implemented, if needed, within
some VM instructions.  Doing that systematically would be a mistake.
In a future
version of Jitter I plan to provide (optional) generation of tagging and
untagging C macros, relying on data specification as provided by the user; the
exact data representation will be chosen by Jitter at generation time.
Of course a user will still be free to do it in her own different way.}

@fixme{exceptions: no, not a fundamental mechanism and way too dependent
on the execution model (but I'm not against them).  They can be implemented.}

@fixme{garbage collection: strictly optional
(@pxref{Garbage collection}), and a GC different from
the one included in Jitter must be easy to interface to the system.
Even one with precise pointer finding.}

@fixme{safety features: static code verification, sandboxing: no,
these kill expressivity, performance, or both.  Static checks can be
added to the VM code generator, and dynamic checks to instructions.
Personally I'd make them optional, but you're free to make things
different.  Running code downloaded from who knows where should be
discouraged.}

@fixme{external representation for code, to be saved and loaded: I
am not a fan of the idea and it is not implemented right now; anyway
it could be added without a lot of pain; the only real problem is just that
some constant expressions involving machine parameters such as the
word size would need to be stored symbolically, in order to be
evaluated at load time.  This can be done quite easily in the existing
VM frontend; the C API would get uglier, but maybe not too much.
The thing can be done in a VM-independent way,
or possibly in a VM-dependent way yielding a very compact binary
format.  Another problem, in the future, will be data embedded in
routines @fixme{did I mean what are now called snippets?}.
Since introducing tagging in every word is out of the
question, data would be in a state where saving is possible only right
after initialization.  Again, this may complicate the C API.}


@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Comparison with other systems
@section Comparison with other systems

@menu
* The price in performance::                 Jittery code is fast but not always optimal.
* Comparison with ahead-of-time compilers::  Jittery VMs versus traditional compilers.
* Comparison with JITs::                     Jittery VMs versus Just In Time compilers.
* Comparison with Vmgen and GForth::         Jitter versus Vmgen, another VM generator.
@end menu

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node The price in performance
@subsection The price in performance

@itemize @bullet
@item Register availability
@fixme{write}
@item Calling conventions
@fixme{write}
@item Flags
@fixme{write: special-purpose flag registers are not natural to model explicitly in C,
and therefore in Jitter.  In particular it is not practical to keep them in a known
state across VM instructions.  Architectures with no special flag registers
(RISC-V, MIPS, Alpha) work in a natural way with no penalty; the others can
be made to behave like them, at some performance loss.}
@item Machine idioms
@fixme{write; delay slots, VLIW.  The SH case, which may be an extreme unsolvable case}
@item Instruction scheduling
@fixme{write}
@item Memory usage
@fixme{write; modest impact.  Portability lost only with respect to very small machines, 16-bit
and below: a few megabytes are enough for running a Jittery VM.}
@end itemize

@fixme{A compromise involving some loss of low-level control, in
exchange for portability and flexibility.}

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Comparison with ahead-of-time compilers
@subsection Comparison with ahead-of-time compilers
@fixme{something}

@cindex vectorization
@fixme{No very sophisticated compiler to reuse; vectorization is a good example}

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Comparison with JITs
@subsection Comparison with JITs
Even as it is, Jitter's frontend should run much faster than the
alternative of spawning @command{gcc} or even just @command{as} plus
@command{ld} processes, and then using @code{dlopen} to link object
code.

@fixme{JITs: Jitter is more portable and I believe it can generate
code of similar quality.  Jitter is not yet as easy to use as JITs
working with high-level expressions and abstracting over register
allocation: right now some optimization effort has to come from user
code (@pxref{compiling-expressions}).
One could argue that an in-memory assembler is a form of JIT;
compared to that alternative a Jittery VM is @emph{way} more convenient
to use, but the combination of rewriting and specialization will probably
always be slower than in-process assembling.  I believe that this last
point will not cause a bottleneck in the entire application, but this is
a conjecture to be validated experimentally.}

@menu
* C is only an implementation tool::  Your VMs can behave differently from C programs.
@end menu

@c @@@@@@@@@@@
@node C is only an implementation tool
@subsubsection C is only an implementation tool
@cindex garbage collector
@cindex coroutine
@cindex thread, cooperative
@cindex tagging, of objects
@cindex introspection
@cindex run-time type information
@cindex type information, run-time
@cindex C, runtime model
There is no dependency on the C runtime model: for example switching
the current call stack (when any exists) can be done from a VM
instruction, with or without copying, to implement the equivalent of
continuations or just cooperative threads or coroutines.  A Jittery
system can support a garbage collector with exact pointer finding and
a custom memory allocator (@pxref{Garbage collection}), if so desired;
runtime information about the type of each object can be made available
at runtime if so desired---or not, when not needed.
@cindex Andrew Appel
@cindex Compiling with Continuations
@cindex Forth
@cindex stack
@cindex register
@cindex continuation
@cindex accumulator
@cindex activation record, function
@cindex frame (function activation record)
@cindex function activation record
@cindex function frame
@cindex procedure activation record
@cindex procedure frame
@cindex heap
@cindex garbage collector
Jitter
makes it easy to experiment with unusual runtime data structures,
for example a Forth-style dual-stack architecture, the
stack-plus-accumulator
organization adopted by Caml bytecode, or Appel's ``Compiling with
Continuations'' model relying on a fixed number of registers and
@emph{no stack}, with function activation
records allocated on a garbage-collected heap.  Even C
ABIs are only relevant when a Jittery VM calls external functions
written in C.

Jittery VMs' reliance on C at compile time does not prevent them from
deviating from C's runtime model, possibly to a radical extent.
In this sense a Jittery VM is not less general than a JIT directly emitting
native machine instruction under user control.

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Comparison with Vmgen and GForth
@subsection Comparison with Vmgen and GForth
@cindex Vmgen
@cindex GForth
@fixme{vmgen}

@fixme{I've learned a lot from the GForth people, particularly Anton
Ertl's publications.}
@fixme{What's new in Jitter: specialization, including instruction rewriting;
and I'm particularly proud of my @code{JITTER_BRANCH_FAST} hack
(@pxref{fast-branch-implementation}).
I'm unconvinced about Ertl's [et al] proposal about literal patching,
particularly with respect to GOTs, so I've solved the problem differently.
My approach requires more manual porting work, despite remaining trivial
(@pxref{Porting}), but in practice I believe that porting will be possible
to a wider range of architectures---essentially, @emph{all} register
machines with a sufficiently wide addressing space.  With the crucial exception
of fast labels my instruction immediates are slightly less efficient than in
Ertl's proposal.  In most instances this disadvantage is canceled, if not
reversed, by specialization on immediates.}

When using advanced dispatching models @fixme{Jitter} is more strongly
reliant on GCC, and therefore more fragile, than Vmgen---and similar in this
respect to @command{gforth-fast}.

@fixme{Understandably, GForth and Vmgen are optimized for stacks and
nullary VM instructions; Jitter is an attempt to generate efficient VM
code using registers and VM instructions with arguments.  Jittery VMs
are also efficient with nullary VM instructions, which are just a
particularly easy subset of the cases to handle, and with Forth-style
stacks, which are simple to implement with two registers each when
using the TOS optimization, and just one each when not.}

@fixme{My computers are named after the computer scientists I admire.  I've
named my most powerful machine @samp{moore} after Chuck Moore, but I
suspect Mr@. Moore wouldn't name his computer after me.
Jitter violates his ideas about not being overly general until the
need arises.}


@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node License
@section License

@cindex free software
@cindex GPL
@cindex GNU GPL
@cindex copyleft
@cindex strong copyleft
I believe free software projects have been using permissive licenses
too much at least in the last ten years, in practice providing tools
to the public on which to develop proprietary software to the
disadvantage of the community.  I want to reverse that trend.
Everybody is welcome to use Jitter, but it and the machines
it produces will be covered by a strong copyleft.  If there has to be
a competitive advantage, let that be in favor of free software.

@cindex GNU
@cindex FSF
@cindex Free Software Foundation
@cindex RMS
@cindex Richard Stallman
@cindex Stallman, Richard
@cindex license
@cindex copyleft
@cindex copyright
@cindex copyright assignment
I plan to propose Jitter to the GNU Project, to be released as
official GNU software.  If the project is accepted I will then
immediately assign its copyright to the Free Software Foundation,
which will then have the power to decide on the specific license as
long as Jitter remains free software.  If RMS decided to use a more
lax license for some strategic reason I would trust his judgement;
indeed I cannot think of anybody I would trust more on these issues.
But as long as I legally control this software, its code will be
distributed only under strong copyleft.

This is free software, released under the GNU General Public License,
version 3 or later.



@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Contacting the author
@section Contacting the author
@c FIXME[contactingme]
@cindex author
@cindex Luca Saiu
@cindex Saiu, Luca
You can find my contact information on my personal web site
@url{http://ageinghacker.net}.

@cindex email
@cindex mailing list
I enjoy discussing technical issues in a public forum; there is no
mailing list specifically about Jitter right now, but you are free to
use the epsilon public mailing list @email{epsilon-devel@@gnu.org}
for talking about Jitter as well.
@cindex email
Still, I particularly value and respect privacy: if for any reason
you prefer to communicate with me in private you can also contact me
at @email{positron@@gnu.org}.

@cindex ego
As long as you respect the license you are welcomed to use Jitter in
any way you like, even if your views about language VMs, or indeed
about anything, happen to differ from mine (@pxref{About language
virtual machines}).
If you are building something fun or ambitious with Jitter I will
appreciate a message from you, in case you feel like tickling my ego.
Otherwise do not worry too much: my ego will survive by metabolizing
its own fat for a very long time.
@*
@*
@cindex hacking
Happy hacking.


@c Here starts the actual documentation, written in a more formal
@c tone.  Everything from here on should be in the first person
@c *plural*.


@c Tutorial part
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@part Part I@* Tutorial documentation


@c Working with Jitter sources
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@node Working with the Jitter sources
@chapter Working with the Jitter sources
@cindex source code, Jitter
@cindex packages, distribution
@cindex distribution packages
@cindex Debian
@cindex test suite
This chapter explains how to build Jitter from its source code,
recommending a specific directory organization which will also be
adopted in the following.  It does not cover package systems such as
the one from the Debian GNU/Linux distribution.  As a still young project
as of Summer 2017 Jitter has not yet been packaged by any distribution;
anyway building it from the sources is trivial, and has the important
advantage of providing access to the test suite.

@cindex source code, Jitter
@cindex Autoconf
@cindex Automake
@cindex Libtool
@cindex GNU Autoconf
@cindex GNU Automake
@cindex GNU Libtool
@cindex Gnulib
Jitter follows the standard GNU build conventions and relies on
Autoconf and Automake
(@pxref{Top,,, autoconf, The GNU Autoconf Manual}
and
@ref{Top,,, automake, The GNU Automake Manual}).  It also uses
Gnulib (@pxref{Top,,, libtool, The Gnulib Manual})
for portability of the code-generating utility, but not in the
generated C code, and
GNU Libtool (@pxref{Top,,, libtool, The GNU Libtool Manual})
for handling shared libraries.

@cindex dependency, compile-time
@cindex compiler, C
@cindex C compiler
@cindex header, C
@cindex @command{make}
@cindex Unix utility
@cindex utility, Unix
@cindex tarball
@cindex GCC
Jitter release tarballs have no mandatory compile-time dependencies
other than what is normally needed to build programs written in C: a C
compiler, C library headers, @command{make}, and a few standard
utilities found in any Unix system such as @command{sed}.  Jitter is
supposed to be very portable, but is developed and routinely tested
only on GNU systems.  Advanced VM dispatching modes require GCC
(@pxref{Top,,, gcc, The GNU Compiler Collection Manual}).

@cindex emulator
@cindex test suite
@cindex cross compiling
The way of building Jitter will look familiar and unsurprising to
anyone accustomed to the GNU build system, the only exception being the
extra provision for running the test suite on cross-compiled programs
through an emulator.

@*
@cindex git
@cindex @file{README-hacking}
Users unfamiliar with the GNU build system should start from the
generic @file{INSTALL} file.

Jitter development snapshots downloaded from the git repository
also contain @file{README-hacking}, an additional text file with
information for users working with unreleased versions.
@cindex dependency, compile-time
@cindex Flex
@cindex Bison
@cindex Libtool
@cindex Autoconf
@cindex Automake
@cindex Texinfo
@cindex help2man
@cindex GNU Bison
@cindex GNU Texinfo
@cindex GNU help2man
@cindex GNU Libtool
@cindex GNU Autoconf
@cindex GNU Automake
@cindex git
@cindex Version-Control System
@cindex snapshot, git
Working from a git snapshot requires git, of course, plus a few tools
hopefully already installed on developer machines such as GNU Autoconf,
GNU Automake, GNU Libtool, Flex, GNU Bison, GNU Texinfo and GNU help2man.
@file{README-hacking} contains the whole dependency list, and in any
case the @command{configure} script will check for each requirement
and complain if any is missing.

@c @@@@@@@
@cindex @command{configure}

@cindex build directory
@cindex source directory

@cindex architecture, CPU
@cindex ISA (CPU architecture)

@menu
* Building conventions and tips::   Some suggestions for working with Jitter sources.
* Configuration::                   You have to prepare the Jitter sources to be built.
* Generating the documentation::    You can rebuild this manual in several formats.
* Building::                        Compiling Jitter into a machine-language program, and libraries.
* Running the test suite::          Automatic checks on Jitter to make sure it actually works.
* Installing::                      Copying Jitter programs and data files to system directories.
@end menu

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Building conventions and tips
@section Building conventions and tips
@fixme{directory organization, cross-compiling directories, reversible installation, stow,
what a good build machine is, this is for GNU and likely BSD and everything else is untested}

@menu
* Cross-compiling::         Using one architecture to generate code for another.
@end menu

@c @@@@@@@
@node Cross-compiling
@subsection Cross-compiling [probably not: better to merge this into the previous sections]
@cindex cross-compiling
@cindex compiling, cross-
@cindex crosstool-ng
@cindex emulator
@cindex QEmu
@cindex architecture, CPU
@cindex ISA (CPU architecture)
@cindex Stow
@cindex GNU Stow

@fixme{(@pxref{Top,,, stow, The GNU Stow Manual})}

@fixme{Cross-compilation: why cross-compiling Jitter is useful but a
``cross-Jitter'' doesn't make sense}


@c @@@@@@@
@node Configuration
@section Configuration
@cindex @command{configure}
@cindex @file{configure.ac}
@cindex GNU build system
@cindex Autoconf
@cindex GNU Autoconf
@cindex GNU Automake

@fixme{be sure to read the output from @command{configure}; if @command{configure} fails without a
clear error message, showing a syntax error with a line number, please send a bug report including
information about your system, your @command{configure} command line and the complete output.}

@c @@@@@@@
@node Generating the documentation
@section Generating the documentation
@cindex Texinfo
@cindex GNU Texinfo
@cindex @TeX{}
@cindex @LaTeX{} (non-requirement)
@fixme{new versions of this manual; optional; the Info version is already there in tarballs}

@c @@@@@@@
@node Building
@section Building

@cindex @command{make}
@cindex building, Jitter
@cindex GNU build system
@cindex compiling, Jitter
@cindex Automake
@cindex GNU Automake
After configuration has succeeded building Jitter should be a simple
matter of running @samp{make}.  This will generate the
@command{jitter} program in the @file{bin} build subdirectory, plus
one runtime library per enabled dispatching model.  Building should be
fast.

At this point it is recommended to build the examples as well, by
typing @samp{make examples}.  Building examples entails executing
the @file{bin/jitter} program generated earlier, which is
not possible under cross-compiling (as @file{bin/jitter} in this case
will match the @emph{host}, rather than the @emph{build}, machine)
unless an emulator was specified; if using an emulator, this is a good
way of testing it for the first time on a relatively simple program.
Building the examples involves compiling large generated C files, which
will be slower than building @file{jitter} and the libraries, and will
also require more RAM.
@*
If everything works the example programs will appear in the @file{bin}
build subdirectory along with @file{jitter}.  Again the example
programs will be one per dispatching model, each with the name
@file{uninspired--} followed by the dispatching model name.  The
``Uninspired'' VM, if not terribly original, is a representative example
of a Jitter virtual machine, to be discussed later in some detail:
@pxref{Tutorial}.

It is still possible to cross-compile the example programs even
without an emulator, by copying the generated C files from another
build---for example a native build on the same machine.  After copying
@file{example-vms/uninspired/*.[ch]} from another @emph{build}
directory (the Uninspired generated files are not sources, and are not
distributed either) to @file{example-vms/uninspired/} under the current
(cross) @emph{build} directory @samp{make examples} should succeed; at
that point the generated files @file{bin/uninspired--*} can be moved
to the host machine and run.
@*
If the generated C files copied from elsewhere are not used by
@samp{make examples} the reason may be a different timestamp: as a
simple workaround you may @command{touch} them: the generated files have
to be more recent than their dependencies for @command{make} not to attempt
to regenerate them.

The test suite will run the ``Uninspired'' VM programs under each enabled
dispatching model, building the Uninspired VM executables as
dependencies if not already present.


@c @@@@@@@
@node Running the test suite
@section Running the test suite
@cindex test suite
@cindex test case
@cindex suite, test
@cindex check
@cindex automatic tests
@cindex @command{make check}
@cindex @code{check}, make target
@cindex GNU Automake
@cindex TAP test protocol
@cindex test protocol, TAP
@cindex emulator
@cindex QEmu
@cindex Valgrind
@cindex memory leak
@cindex leak, memory
@cindex initialization
@cindex finalization
The test suite works by compiling the Uninspired VM using all the enabled
dispatching modes and then running small routines on top of it, comparing
the program output against expected results.
The test suite is supported in native configurations, and even on cross
configurations as long as a working emulator is available to run the
compiled VMs.

You can execute the test suite by simply typing @code{make check}.

The test suite will display a detailed textual report mentioning each
test case, with color on most configurations---any red text indicates
a problem.  The test suite output closes with a summary such as:
@smallexample
============================================================================
Testsuite summary for Jitter 0.9.0.607-1076-dirty
============================================================================
# TOTAL: 636
# PASS:  636
# SKIP:  0
# XFAIL: 0
# FAIL:  0
# XPASS: 0
# ERROR: 0
============================================================================
@end smallexample
If the number of failures is zero, like in this example, then the test
suite detected no problem; otherwise the output above the summary
needs to be checked more carefully.

@cindex GNU Automake
@cindex TAP test protocol
@cindex test protocol, TAP
@cindex test
The test suite relies on the functionality in GNU Automake and uses
the TAP testing protocol; even used in a simple way as it is TAP
allows for a fine-grained view about the specific nature of the failure,
which helps when investigating a problem.  GNU Autoconf is
also used for shell portability, and to check for optional utilities
to be used at test time when available.  Most of the functionality used
across multiple tests is factored in @file{tests/utility.in}; each
subdirectory of @file{tests} contains one @dfn{test}, as a shell script
(to be preprocessed at configure time in the source tree, and already
preprocessed in the build tree), plus associated data files.
@cindex test case
@cindex case, test
For example the source tree file
@file{tests/interpreter/interpreter.test.in} is a shell script for the
@samp{interpreter} test, to be preprocessed into the build tree file
@file{tests/interpreter/interpreter.test}.  Each test may contain many
individual @dfn{test cases}, each with a 1-based index and a short
human-readable name.  Each test case may pass, fail, or
@dfn{fail expectedly} when a feature is known to be broken.
@cindex Valgrind
@cindex memory leak
Some test cases will be skipped, for example when a dispatching mode
is not enabled, or if the user doesn't have Valgrind available to check
for memory leaks, of again if the test case is only defined on
configurations different from the current one, either lacking or not
requiring a specific feature.

Any @samp{FAIL} line is a symptom of a problem and should never be
ignored.  An @samp{ERROR} line indicates an unexpected problem in the
test script itself, and counts as a bug to report; please do so.

The numbering of test cases will change across Jitter versions, but
some reasonable care will be taken to keep test case names stable; if
you are reporting an unexpected failure, along with the usual
information, please quote the exact line in question, for example
@smallexample
FAIL: tests/interpreter/interpreter.test 44 - count-down minimal-threading
@end smallexample
The test suite subdirectory in the build tree will also contain
data files potentially useful to analyze the problem.  Unless such
files are very large please include them in your reports as well.  In the
case above you may include information about the failed
@samp{interpreter} test case 44 named @samp{count-down minimal-threading}
by sending a tarball containing the relevant files.  You can easily generate
such a file from the build directory:
@smallexample
tar c tests/interpreter/interpreter-44.* | gzip -9 > interpreter-44.tar.gz
@end smallexample

@fixme{be sure to check particularly in critical cases: unusual platform, new GCC version, new Jitter version}

@fixme{in case some test fails reconfigure disabling the offending dispatching model and try again}

@cindex timeout (test suite)
@fixme{A test case hanging is bad.  The Uninspired driver as invoked
from the test suite is supposed to fail after a timeout and the test
scripts contain similar provisions, but the machinery is not
bulletproof, particularly with incorrect machine code running
under emulators or on non-GNU systems.}

@menu
* A test suite is not a correctness proof::       Some bugs may always escape.
@end menu

@c @@@@
@node A test suite is not a correctness proof
@subsection A test suite is not a correctness proof
@cindex correctness proof
@cindex proof, correctness
@cindex theorem
@fixme{even all passes is not a correctness proof.  QEmu, by
design, doesn't emulate L1i invalidation}

@c @@@@@@@
@node Installing
@section Installing
@cindex installing
@cindex Stow
@cindex GNU Stow


@c Tutorial
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@node Tutorial
@chapter Tutorial
@cindex tutorial
@cindex example

@menu
* Using a VM::                  Playing with an existing virtual machine.
* A VM definition::             Why the example VM behaves like it does.
@end menu

@c @@@@@@@
@node Using a VM
@section Using a VM

@menu
* Predefined frontend::         Jitter comes with a parser and printer for your routines.
* Disassembly::                 You can check the generated native code for correctness and efficiency.
* C API tutorial::              Generating and executing VM code from a C program.
* Building tutorial::           Convenient ways to compile programs with embedded VMs.
@end menu

@c @@@
@node Predefined frontend
@subsection Predefined frontend

@c @@@
@node Disassembly
@subsection Disassembly

@c @@@
@node C API tutorial
@subsection C API tutorial

@c @@@
@node Building tutorial
@subsection Building tutorial

@c @@@@@@@
@node A VM definition
@section A VM definition


@c Reference part
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@part Part II@* Reference documentation


@c Invoking @command{jitter}
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@c This node name is required by the GNU standards.

@node Invoking @command{jitter}
@chapter Invoking @command{jitter}
@cindex invoking
@cindex command line
@cindex @command{jitter}


@c Standalone VMs
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@node Standalone VMs
@chapter Standalone VMs

@cindex standalone


@c Compiling Jittery programs
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@node Compiling Jittery programs
@chapter Compiling Jittery programs

@menu
* Generating and compiling C code::  These are two separate steps.
* Building a Jittery program::       How to do it in practice.
@end menu

@c @@@@@@@
@node Generating and compiling C code
@section Generating and compiling C code
@cindex two-stage build
@cindex build, two-stage

@menu
* Cross-compiling VMs:: How to compile a VM to be run on an incompatible machine.
@end menu

@c @@@@
@node Cross-compiling VMs
@subsection Cross-compiling VMs
@cindex cross-compiling
@cindex compiling, cross-

@c @@@
@node Building a Jittery program
@section Building a Jittery program
@anchor{build-system}
@cindex build system

@menu
* Building preliminaries::    Compiling a Jittery program can be delicate.
* Invoking @command{jitter-config}::    You can print out the right compiler options.
* Autoconf and Automake::     Compiling Jittery programs with the GNU build system.
* Make::                      Simple makefiles and dependencies.
* Other systems::             You're on your own, but you have @command{jitter-config}.
@end menu

@c @@@
@node Building preliminaries
@subsection Building preliminaries
@cindex building, Jittery programs

@fixme{@file{vmprefix-vm2.c} is fragile to compile, and may require its own specific @var{JITTER_CFLAGS}
for correctness.  The rest is actually not fragile, but
you still need to pre-process every file using any Jitter header with
@var{JITTER_CPPFLAGS}; this restriction helps preventing conflicts between
a sub-package Jitter and a different installed version, and makes Jittery VMs
behave consistently with Jitter as a dependency or as a sub-package.}

@cindex @var{JITTER_CPPFLAGS}
@cindex @var{JITTER_CFLAGS}
@cindex @var{JITTER_LDFLAGS}
@cindex @var{JITTER_LDADD}
@fixme{
@var{JITTER_CPPFLAGS}
@var{JITTER_CFLAGS}
@var{JITTER_LDFLAGS}
@var{JITTER_LDADD}.  There are also dispatch-specific versions of these, but
most people will only use the fastest dispatch available on their configuration.
Any C file including any header from Jitter must be preprocessed with
the flags in @var{JITTER_CPPFLAGS}.
}

@c @@@
@node Invoking @command{jitter-config}
@subsection Invoking @command{jitter-config}
@cindex @command{jitter-config}

@c @@@
@node Autoconf and Automake
@subsection Autoconf and Automake
@cindex Autoconf
@cindex GNU Autoconf
@cindex Automake
@cindex GNU Automake
@cindex Libtool
@cindex GNU Libtool

@fixme{the files @file{configure.ac} and @file{Makefile.am} in the
Jitter distribution are much more complex than the ones needed to
build an ordinary Jittery program, because they have to deal with a
non-installed @command{jitter} and exactly specify dependencies on
files which no longer change after installation.  Jitter's own build
system also makes a considerable effort to support cross-compilation
in a convenient way including a running a cross-@command{jitter} and
even the test suite through an emulator, in an effort to test the
critical part of the software as thoroughly as possible.  Ordinary
Jittery programs will avoid going to such lengths.
The recommended way of using Jitter right now is @emph{sub-package mode}:
@pxref{Jitter as a sub-package}.}

@menu
* Jitter as a dependency::  You can install Jitter, use it and link to its runtime.
* Jitter as a sub-package:: You can also distribute Jitter as part of your package.
@end menu

@c @@
@node Jitter as a dependency
@subsubsection Jitter as a dependency
@cindex dependency, Jitter as a
@cindex installing, Jitter

@c @@
@node Jitter as a sub-package
@subsubsection Jitter as a sub-package
@cindex sub-package
@cindex mode, sub-package


@c @@@
@node Make
@subsection Make
@cindex @command{make}

@c @@@
@node Other systems
@subsection Other systems
@cindex script, shell (for building)


@c The Jitter language
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@node Writing VM specifications
@chapter Writing VM specifications

@menu
* Syntax::                      How to write a VM specification.
* Instruction rewriting::       Specialized instructions should not be too many.
* Emacs major mode for Jitter:: Editing VM specification with Emacs.
* Performance tips::            Suggestions for making your VMs fast.
@end menu

@c @@@@@@@
@node Syntax
@section Syntax
@cindex lexicon
@cindex syntax
@cindex specification syntax

@c FIXME: sectioning is questionable in this chapter.  Some sub-sub-sections should become much more prominent.

@subsection Header
@cindex header, VM specification

@subsection Embedding C code

@subsection Meta-instructions

@subsubsection Meta-instruction headers
@cindex header, meta-instruction
@cindex meta-instruction, header

@subsubsection Meta-instruction properties
@table @code
@item non-relocatable
@item cold
@item caller
@item callee
@item returning
@end table

@fixme{Talk about @code{JITTER_LINK} and branch-and-link branches.}

Talk about @code{JITTER_LINK} and branch-and-link branches.
Talk about @code{JITTER_LINK} and branch-and-link branches.
Talk about @code{JITTER_LINK} and branch-and-link branches.
Talk about @code{JITTER_LINK} and branch-and-link branches.
Talk about @code{JITTER_LINK} and branch-and-link branches.
Talk about @code{JITTER_LINK} and branch-and-link branches.
Talk about @code{JITTER_LINK} and branch-and-link branches.
Talk about @code{JITTER_LINK} and branch-and-link branches.
Talk about @code{JITTER_LINK} and branch-and-link branches.
Talk about @code{JITTER_LINK} and branch-and-link branches.
Talk about @code{JITTER_LINK} and branch-and-link branches.
Talk about @code{JITTER_LINK} and branch-and-link branches.
Talk about @code{JITTER_LINK} and branch-and-link branches.


@subsubsection Embedding C code in meta-instructions

@subsubsection C macros available to VM instructions
@table @code
@item JITTER_SPECIALIZED_INSTRUCTION_OPCODE

@item JITTER_SPECIALIZED_INSTRUCTION_NAME
@fixme{This may be a bad idea.  It is very difficult to use correctly
with replicated code, out of non-relocatable instructions.  A good use of
this is for comments in inline assembly.}

@item JITTER_SPECIALIZED_INSTRUCTION_MANGLED_NAME
@end table

@table @code
@item JITTER_ARG@var{i}
@item JITTER_ARGP@var{i}
@item JITTER_ARGU@var{i}
@item JITTER_ARGN@var{i}
@item JITTER_ARGF@var{i}
@end table

@table @code
@item JITTER_FAST_REGISTER(class, index)
@item JITTER_FAST_REGISTER_@var{c}_@var{i}
@end table

/* Expand to the i-th register, which must be a slow register, as an lvalue.
   The given index must be a register index counting from 0 and including fast
   regusters as well, if there are any.  For example if an r class had 3 fast
   registers then the first slow register would be %r3, to be accessed as
   JITTER_SLOW_REGISTER(r, 3).  It would be invalid to access %r0, %r1 and
   %r2 which this macro, as %r0, %r1 and %r2 would be fast. */
@table @code
@item JITTER_SLOW_REGISTER_@var{c}_@var{i}
@end table
/* It's not possible to have a single macro JITTER_REGISTER taking an index and
   expanding to either a fast or a slow register lvalue, due to CPP conditional
   limitations.  This restriction is unfortunate, but we have to live with it
   as long as we don't switch to a different preprocessor.
   What we can have is a set of zero-argument macros each expanding to a register
   lvalue, for *a limited number* of registers.  Here we define access macros for
   every fast register plus a reasonable number (currently 32) of slow registers,
   per class. */
@table @code
@item JITTER_REGISTER_@var{c}_@var{i}
@end table
for every class @var{c} and for
enough indices @var{i} to cover every fast register and 32 slow registers.

@table @code
@item JITTER_BRANCH(@var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST(@var{where})
@end table

@table @code
@item JITTER_BRANCH_AND_LINK(@var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_AND_LINK(@var{where})
@end table

@table @code
@item JITTER_LINK
@end table

@table @code
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_ZERO(@var{e0}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_NONZERO(@var{e0}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_POSITIVE(@var{e0}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_NONPOSITIVE(@var{e0}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_NEGATIVE(@var{e0}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_NONNEGATIVE(@var{e0}, @var{where})
@end table
@fixme{Document or possibly even remove the non-fast variants of these.}

@table @code
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_EQUAL(@var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_NOTEQUAL(@var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_LESS_SIGNED(@var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_NOTLESS_SIGNED(@var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_LESS_UNSIGNED(@var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_NOTLESS_UNSIGNED(@var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_GREATER_SIGNED(@var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_NOTGREATER_SIGNED(@var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_GREATER_UNSIGNED(@var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_NOTGREATER_UNSIGNED(@var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@end table
@fixme{Document or possibly even remove the non-fast variants of these.}

@table @code
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_AND(@var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_NOTAND(@var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@end table
@fixme{Document or possibly even remove the non-fast variants of these.}
@fixme{Explain how not-and is different from nand, and why we do not want nand here.}

@table @code
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_NEGATE_OVERFLOWS(@var{e0} @var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_PLUS_OVERFLOWS(@var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_MINUS_OVERFLOWS(@var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_TIMES_OVERFLOWS(@var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_DIVIDED_OVERFLOWS(@var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_REMAINDER_OVERFLOWS(@var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@end table
@fixme{Document or possibly even remove the non-fast variants of these.}

@table @code
@item JITTER_NEGATE_BRANCH_FAST_IF_OVERFLOW(@var{et}, @var{e0}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_PLUS_BRANCH_FAST_IF_OVERFLOW(@var{et}, @var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_MINUS_BRANCH_FAST_IF_OVERFLOW(@var{et}, @var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_TIMES_BRANCH_FAST_IF_OVERFLOW(@var{et}, @var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_DIVIDED_BRANCH_FAST_IF_OVERFLOW(@var{et}, @var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@item JITTER_REMAINDER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_OVERFLOW(@var{et}, @var{e0}, @var{e1}, @var{where})
@end table
@fixme{Document or possibly even remove the non-fast variants of these.}

@fixme{document stacks operations}

@c @@@@@@@
@node Instruction rewriting
@section Instruction rewriting
@cindex rewriting
@cindex instruction rewriting

@anchor{optimization-rewriting}

@c @@@@@@@
@node Emacs major mode for Jitter
@section Emacs major mode for Jitter
@cindex Emacs, major mode for Jitter
@cindex major mode (Emacs)
@cindex mode, major (Emacs)

@c @@@@@@@
@node Performance tips
@section Performance tips
@cindex performance
@cindex suggestions, performance
@cindex tips, performance

@fixme{for register machines having a lot of registers is important.
@fixme{is it possible to have too many?  I see performance degradation on
x86_64, but that is probably due to bad choices in residual registers.}
Keeping the number of meta-instructions smaller, and making the non-critical
ones non-relocatable, can buy you more fast registers.}

@fixme{number of instruction arguments: residuals have a cost at run time;
non-residuals have a cost at compile time, and may make the VM too large
to compile}

@fixme{optimize for the common case: for example making division
non-relocatable will probably not be a problem: the time spent in
division will hardly ever be significant, in almost any routine.  This
is probably true for multiplication as well, unless you're doing
graphics.  You can always optimize the common (and cheaper) cases of
multiplying by, dividing and taking the reminder or a power of two
with rewrites into different, relocatable instructions:
@math{a@ 2^b} can be rewritten into @samp{a << b},
@math{a/2^b} into @samp{a >> b} (as long as @math{a} is unsigned)
and @math{a@ mod@ 2^b} into @samp{a & ((1 << b) - 1)}.  The rewrite
targets can have one specialized literal.}

@fixme{CISC vs RISC: cite the APL argument
@fixme{my previous deleted text, to reword:
@emph{The opponents of this argument point out at languages with very
complex primitives such as APL, where the interpretation overhead
becomes proportionally less significant compared to the time spent in
primitives, each one performing a greater amount of useful work than
in other designs.  The counter-argument has the merit of recognizing
one source of the problem, and that languages like APL are indeed
easier to deal with than others.  Still, the part of the community
interested in playing with the fundamental elements of computation,
which certainly includes me, will also demand systems providing
control on a finer granularity, where each fundamental operation is
kept as simple as possible and more complex behavior only emerges as
composition of fundamental operations.  This is the case of epsilon,
Forth, and to a slightly lesser extent, Lisp.}
}}

@fixme{CISC vs RISC, flags: orthogonality is not mandatory.  Having
multiple flag registers like on the PowerPC, or using ordinary
registers to store boolean conditions like on RISC-V, MIPS and Alpha looks
neat, but VM flags registers will not be mapped to hardware flag
registers: the ``pretty'' solution on the VM would force
three-argument comparison instructions, bloating the instruction
space, and on most machines would cost two comparisons instead of one
per jump at run time.  The efficient solution for a VM in this case is
a MIPS-style conditional branch instruction taking two arguments (but
on a VM they can be immediate), and a fast label.  Flags should be
considered inherently transient, and keeping their state in a register
across VM instruction will cost hardware instructions.
You should resist the temptation of having both quotient and reminder
computed by one VM instruction, unless the instruction is non-relocatable.}

@fixme{On a VM implied operands (for example a frame pointer or even a
heap allocation pointer held in a fixed register) are fine, as they
reduce the number of VM instruction arguments, limiting their
combinatorial explosion and affording you more fast registers.  It's
perfectly acceptable to design your VM around your ABI: if you change
your mind later, you can change the VM easily: it's not silicon.}

@fixme{constants, particularly if big: specialize if known in advance.}

@fixme{small but performance-critical constants, such as type or
garbage-collection tags, or unique objects (@code{nil} in Lisp): specialize, and define a checking instruction
doing only that, so as to keep the other instructions smaller.  It is
probably better to keep the non-critical path used to handle errors
slow, for example keeping the error handler address on a stack, rather
than passing slow labels around.  Residual arguments are expensive, and
should not be passed every time just to handle rare cases.}

@fixme{fast branches: use the specific macros for conditional branches,
rather than if (condition) BRANCH_FAST(JITTER_ARGF0);
The specific macro generates faster code. @fixme{show the two disassemblies}}


@menu
* Preventing VM instruction defects:: Decouple state updates from control.
* Performance tips for VM routines::  Generating fast routines for a fast VM.
@end menu

@c @@@@@@@
@node Preventing VM instruction defects
@subsection Preventing VM instruction defects

@fixme{make extremely clear that all of this affects
performance but not correctness: having defective instructions
will not make programs crash (after I fix ``the bug'', of
course); but it will be fixed when people actually read this}

@cindex defective, VM instruction
@cindex VM instruction, defect
@cindex instruction, VM, defect
@fixme{@xref{Defective VM instructions}.
@fixme{write this: introduction to the problem, examples}}

@cindex state update, decoupling from control
@cindex control, decoupling from state updates
@cindex decoupling, control from state updates
@fixme{decouple control from state updates, examples}
@fixme{unconditionally updating the VM state and then
having a conditional branch within the same VM instruction
depending on the new, updated state, is less dangerous and
will usually not trigger defects.  But I will have to make
experiments to confirm this.}

@c @@@@@@@
@node Performance tips for VM routines
@subsection Performance tips for VM routines

@fixme{don't waste registers: lower-numbered is better}
@fixme{VM registers in memory are still better than slow registers.}

@fixme{constants, particularly if big: count down rather than up}


@c C API
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@node C API
@chapter C API

@menu
* Initialization::              Setting up a VM before making routines.
* Finalization::                Cleaning up the global state.
* VM state::                    Runtime data structures manipulated by routines.
* VM routines::                 Making and destroying VM routines.
* Running VM routines::         How to call specialized routines.
* Concurrency::                 Working with multiple threads.
@end menu

@c @@@@@@@
@node Initialization
@section Initialization
@cindex initialization

@c @@@@@@@
@node Finalization
@section Finalization
@cindex finalization

@fixme{This has nothing to do with @emph{garbage collection} finalisation:
@pxref{gc-object-finalisation}}

@c @@@@@@@
@node VM state
@section VM state
@cindex VM state
@cindex state, VM

@c @@@@@@@
@node VM routines
@section VM routines
@cindex VM routine
@cindex routine, VM

@menu
* Routine structure::       What VM routines are made of.
* Adding labels::           How to name VM routine points.
* Adding instructions::     How to add VM instructions to a routine.
* Executable routines::     Converting routines into an executable format.
* Code execution::          There are several ways of calling VM code from C.
* Multiple routines::       Making VM routines jump to one another.
@end menu

@c @@@
@node Routine structure
@subsection Routine structure
@cindex routine, VM, structure
@cindex structure, VM routine
@cindex VM routine, structure

@c @@@
@node Adding labels
@subsection Adding labels
@cindex label, C API

@c @@@
@node Adding instructions
@subsection Adding instructions
@cindex instruction, VM, C API
@cindex VM instruction, C API

@c @@@
@node Executable routines
@subsection Executable routines
@cindex executable routine
@cindex routine, executable

@c @@@
@node Code execution
@subsection Code execution
@cindex execution, VM code

@c @@@
@node Multiple routines
@subsection Multiple routines
@cindex multiple VM routines
@cindex VM routines, multiple
@cindex routine, VM, multiple

@c @@@@@@@
@node Running VM routines
@section Running VM routines
@cindex running VM routine
@cindex routine, VM, running
@cindex VM routine, running

@c @@@@@@@
@node Concurrency
@section Concurrency
@cindex concurrency

@fixme{The Jittery C API is thread-safe, including the Flex/Bison
frontend.  After initialization no global variables are written, and
the code is reentrant.  @fixme{This is currently true becasue I use a
separate call to @code{mmap} for every native code allocation, but it
will get more complicated: in the future I will need a mutex for code
allocation, almost certainly hidden in the implementation.  I should
mention here the dependency on POSIX threads, or as an alternative the
need for the user to manually synchronize the one critical
operation.}}

@fixme{The VM @emph{state} data structures encodes the execution state
of a single thread.  Having different threads working concurrently on
different states, possibly executing the same code, @emph{is} supported.
There is no global interpreter lock.}

@fixme{The user needs to take care of synchronization herself, when
needed.  Of course it is possible to break reentrancy from
user code, but it should be easy to avoid that.}


@c Data representation and tagging
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@node Data representation and tagging
@chapter Data representation and tagging

@quotation
Is it not entirely clear which of the techniques were already known to one of us and which ones we reinvented
@end quotation
From the acknowledgments in @bibref{Gudeman 1993}.

I share that sentiment.



@menu
* Design issues::           Choosing your tagging scheme.
* Tag API::                 Working with tags in a Jittery VM.
@end menu

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Design issues
@section Design issues

@menu
* Boxed and unboxed data::  Not every object fits in a register.
* Bit twiddling and tags::  Low-order bits of pointers can be used for tags.
* Object headers::          When tag bits are not enough.
* Shapes are not types::    Language-level types are not usually relevant.
* Parsable heaps::          Parsability is not mandatory but desirable.
* Checking and dispatching::Sometimes efficient dispatch is important.
* Tagging recommendations:: What I believe to be the best solution.
* Custom tagging::          If you want to do things differently you can.
* No tagging::              Some systems work with non-tagged data.
@end menu

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Boxed and unboxed data
@subsection Boxed and unboxed data

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Bit twiddling and tags
@subsection Bit twiddling and tags

@fixme{heap pointers are aligned: low bits are zero}

@fixme{some high bits are also often zero, particularly on 64-bit
machines}

@fixme{low bits are better than high bits: immediate representation,
compatibility with conservative pointer finding, efficiency in memory
access}

@fixme{shifting: you want it for fixnums, not for pointers}

@fixme{sign extension and right-shifting in C: there is a Jitter macro}

@fixme{untagging: and versus subtraction}

@fixme{should the tagged pointer point to a header rather than to the
beginning of user data?  On almost all machines in makes no
difference; SH the one exception I know.}

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Object headers
@subsection Object headers

@fixme{It is also possible to have a header which is only useful at
collection time, in order to distinguish the object shape and know
which fields need to be updated and which must not be touched; still
the shape may be distinguishable from its unique pointer tag alone,
for efficiency's sake.  I plan to do this for JitterLisp closures,
where performance is critical: closures are used all the time and
the type check at the beginning of a call must be fast.}

@fixme{@dfn{type code} (the first header word), name from Gudeman.
The type code must suffice to recognize the shape of an object, but
it does not need to be limited to one constant word per shape: it
can contain other information as well.}

@fixme{rename ``type code'' to ``shape code''?  If I do I have to do
it in the sources as well.}

@fixme{The remark at
@ref{tagged-objects-must-not-look-like-type-codes} is important: it is
the user's responsibility to ensure that no tagged object is ever
created which is also valid as a type code}

@anchor{padding-datum}
@fixme{Another possible application of unique objects is for inserting
as padding in headerless objects where not every word is used.
@fixme{add a macro to make this easy}.  It would make perfect sense
to have a one-word @code{#<padding>} object, to be found when scanning
the heap.
@fixme{Document @code{JITTER_GC_PAD_HEADERLESS_OBJECT}.
I could even provide a helper macro
@code{JITTER_GC_ALLOCATE_AND_PAD_HEADERLESS}, but having a very friendly
C API might not be that useful: such a macro would not be usable from
VM code where heap allocation follows a different pattern.
}}


@c @@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Shapes are not types
@subsection Shapes are not types

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Parsable heaps
@subsection Parsable heaps

@fixme{Give the definition.  We do not require parsable heaps, but
a weaker condition which allows for headerless boxed objects.
Headerless boxed objects must be made of individually valid tagged
objects only.}

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Checking and dispatching
@subsection Checking and dispatching

@fixme{a @code{type} procedure}

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Tagging recommendations
@subsection Tagging recommendations

@menu
* Unique data::  Some objects exist in only one instance.
* Characters or code points::  Many possible values, each unique.
* Fixnums::      Small integers are common and must be efficient.
* Flonums::      Keeping floating-point numbers unboxed.
* Conses::       Keep conses compact in memory, with no headers.
* Closures_::    Closures should be fast to shape-check.
* Primitives::   These are heavily used, but maybe not heavily shape-checked.
* Arrays::       Arrays are easy enough to manage.
* Symbols::      The representation of symbols can be inefficient.
* Bignums::      You can afford headers when operations are slow anyway.
* Possibly large objects::Objects not fitting in the heap need special treatment.
* Finalisable objects::Finalisation requires care with some collectors.
* Code objects:: VM routines as objects require care at destruction.
* Other data types::  Other miscellaneous shapes.
* Broken hearts::Broken hearts need a header with a type tag, not a pointer tag.
@end menu

@c @@@@@
@node Unique data
@subsubsection Unique data

@fixme{Booleans, empty list, EOF, ``nothing'', ``undefined'' values
reserved for errors.  A ``padding'' value (@pxref{padding-datum})}

@fixme{If variable state needs to be associated to some unique objects
the state can be kept in a global table out of the heap, without
representing unique objects as pointers; they could be rather
tagged array indices.  This strategy not involving pointers makes
adding new unique values easy.}

@anchor{tagged-objects-must-not-look-like-type-codes}
@fixme{A trick to keep the heap parsable: representing type codes
as unique data.  Only a finite number is needed, and when they do not
contain other fields they are all known in advance.  In this case it
becomes invalid to make unboxed values with the value of a type code as
user objects, in the presence of headerless boxed objects: it would
confuse the collector, which
would become unable to distinguish an unboxed object from the
beginning of a boxed object.  Such an error is detected at run time
in some cases, only when @code{JITTER_GC_DEBUG} defined.}

@fixme{unique values are usually unboxed, but they can also encode
pointers to out-of-heap data --- in which case they can be treated as
unboxed by the garbage collector.}

@fixme{enumerates}

@c @@@@@
@node Characters or code points
@subsubsection Characters or code points

@fixme{explain the trick I use in JitterLisp}

@c @@@@@
@node Fixnums
@subsubsection Fixnums

@fixme{a tag of all @code{0}s is best for fast arithmetic.}

@c @@@@@
@node Flonums
@subsubsection Flonums

@fixme{a tag of all @code{1}s is best, when a tag of all @code{0}s
is used for fixnums.}

@fixme{@code{jitter_float} may be acceptable.
If not, things are more complicated.
Some platforms require double values to be aligned to 64 bits, and
others, while not having a strict requirement, suffer from a
performance hit from misaligned accesses.
@code{double} values on 32-bit platforms requiring 64-bit alignment
will be messy @fixme{@fixme{Now I have an excellent solution}I have no good solution for this yet.  Even adding
a padding field to every object would not work for data different
from @code{double} requiring wider alignment (for example vector data).
Maybe creating a padding object.
I have some experimental code in
@file{~/repos/jitter/my-tests/alignment-and-object-headers/alignment-and-object-headers.c},
not in the git repository, containing the right formulas which are
not completely trivial.
The best solution is almost certainly raising the minimum heap object
size to the maximum alignment, and then pad in a fixed way.  Of course
heap pages must also be aligned.
}}

@cindex 0
@cindex zero
@cindex cancellation law
@cindex integer (as a floating-point datum)
@cindex optimisation, misguided
@cindex misguided optimisation
@cindex untag
Some users might be tempted to save one instruction when untagging by
not clearing a non-zero tag after converting a tagged object to
floating point, and keep the tag bits as they are as part of the
floating-point value; after all a bit pattern of all zeros in untagged
floating-point data appears just as arbitrary as the original tag.
This intuition has the unfortunate flaw of not allowing for an exact
representation of most integers as floating-point data, including
zero.  Floating-point calculations such as @samp{2.0 * 3.0},
@samp{2.0 * 1.0}
or
@samp{10.0 * 0.0}
yielding inexact results and violating
algebraic cancellation laws feel hardly suitable to any application.

However the optimization attempt described above succeeds in a
different setting, on systems lacking fixnums and where the only
available numbers are floating-point.  In such a scenario the
floating-point tag should in fact be chosen as zero, which eliminates
any untagging overhead while keeping small integers representable
in floating point with no error.

@fixme{how inefficient would it be to @emph{round} a fixed-point
number at the time of untagging, keeping into account the smaller
mantissa?  What I am currently doing is efficient but in practice
amounts to truncation.
@url{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Floating-point_arithmetic#Rounding_modes}}

@c @@@@@
@node Conses
@subsubsection Conses

@c @@@@@
@node Closures_
@subsubsection Closures_

@fixme{fast shape-checking is usually important.  An additional header
with a type code just to keep the heap parsable, however, should not
be a problem.}

@c @@@@@
@node Primitives
@subsubsection Primitives

@fixme{These are heavily used, but we can make them not heavily
shape-checked.}

@fixme{I recommend the JitterLisp solution: hide primitives from users
by providing predefined closure wrappers for them: closure wrappers,
while safe when called, internally use primitives in an unsafe way.
Compiled VM code or even correctly formed interpreted code based on
ASTs does not pay for the indirection, thanks to a simple
optimization.  This way there will be no need to check for primitive
shape at call time}

@fixme{Primitives may be tagged indices into a global read-only table,
or tagged pointers to non-heap data, or directly to a function.  The
programmer must guarantee that such out-of-heap data remain aligned
somehow, for example with the functionality form @code{stdalign.h} or
the GNU C attribute @code{aligned}.}

@c @@@@@
@node Arrays
@subsubsection Arrays

@fixme{they are allocated frequently on a large scale: keep them
compact in memory}

@fixme{large objects and indirection}

@c @@@@@
@node Symbols
@subsubsection Symbols

@fixme{since symbols are always boxed and they can be compared by
pointer equality, their memory representation does not really matter:
in this case headers cost nothing}

@fixme{Checking at runtime whether a given object is a symbol
(@code{symbolp} in Common Lisp, @code{symbol?} in Scheme) is not a
common operation in compiled code, which should make a check on the
type code acceptable in most circumstances.}

@c @@@@@
@node Bignums
@subsubsection Bignums

@c @@@@@
@node Possibly large objects
@subsubsection Possibly large objects

@fixme{Boxed with a header including one of two possible values: large
or non-large, followed by an untagged pointer to the actual data.  For
non-large data the pointer points inside the same object payload, and
it is easily handled by the garbage collector.  For large data the
pointer points out of the heap.  Decoding is straight-line code.
Whenever the object is copied the untagged pointer must be updated,
which is easy.}.

@c @@@@@
@node Finalisable objects
@subsubsection Finalisable objects

@c @@@@@
@node Code objects
@subsubsection Code objects

@fixme{finalization of some resources different from the garbage-collected
heap memory may require reference counting.  The C API makes it easy to
handle VM routines in this way, with pin and unpin functions already
provided.}

@c @@@@@
@node Other data types
@subsubsection Other data types

@c @@@@@
@node Broken hearts
@subsubsection Broken hearts

@fixme{broken hearts need a type code, not a specific pointer tag: in
fact a broken heart will be pointed by a tagged pointer, whose tag
will be meaningful; the fact that the object has been forwarded is
recorded in memory within the object itself.}


@c @@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Custom tagging
@subsection Custom tagging

@fixme{Different designs are not as easy to implement as what is
recommended here, but at least Jitter should not prevent them.  If you
find that I am wrong please contact me.}

@fixme{BiBOP}


@c @@@@@@@@@@@@
@node No tagging
@subsection No tagging


@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Tag API
@section Tag API

@menu
* Tag checking in VM code::  You can make the common case very fast.
@end menu

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Tag checking in VM code
@subsection Tag checking in VM code


@c Garbage collection
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@node Garbage collection
@chapter Garbage collection

Jitter includes a garbage collector designed to be compatible with
Jittery VMs and suitable to many user systems.

@cindex Bohem, Hans
@cindex Boehm-Demers-Weiser garbage collector
@cindex garbage collector
@cindex conservative pointer finding
@cindex optional, Jitter garbage collector
The Jitter garbage collector is optional: according to the application
requirements a VM can even operate without any garbage collector at
all, or use some other custom memory subsystem.  Jittery VMs are also
compatible with the Boehm-Demers-Weiser conservative-pointer-finding
collector available at @url{https://www.hboehm.info/gc/}.

@cindex garbage collector
@cindex collector, garbage

@code{struct jitter_gc_heaplet}

@menu
* Garbage collector design::        How this garbage collector works and why.
* Garbage collector API::           How to use the collector from C.
* Heap allocation from VMs::        Some VM instructions make new heap objects.
* GC and threads::                  Allocating concurrently requires care.
* Not yet implemented features::    The Jitter collector will become more powerful.
@end menu

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Garbage collector design
@section Garbage collector design

@fixme{fast allocation, allocating from several threads with no locks,
high allocation and low survival rate.  Reentrant: no global variables
in C exposed to the user.  Multiple heaps containing objects of
different shapes are possible in the same application at the same
time.  Portable, no reliance on hardware page faults.  Optimised for
bandwidth, but usually low lantency as well.  No real-time
guarantees.}

@fixme{portable in practice.  Is is difficult not to rely on undefined
behaviour when comparing pointers one of which may fall out of
allocated space by more than one element (of course I am not speaking
of ever dereferencing them, but even computing their value is
undefined behaviour in C): since any reasonable implementation in a
flat addressing space will allow this and GCC in fact guarantees it
@fixme{find exact citation} I will not be pedantic.  I am fine with
not supporting 16-bit segmented addressed on i386: in protected mode
everything will work as it should.}

@menu
* Exact pointer finding and moving::This kind of garbage collector requires discipline.
@end menu

@c @@@@@@@@@@@
@node Exact pointer finding and moving
@subsection Exact pointer finding and moving

@fixme{Comparison with Boehm's collector, which is widely used.}

@fixme{Some deserved praise for Boehm's work, which is very impressive
given the problem he solves.  A collector like ours plays the game
with different rules.}

@fixme{Cite my own attempt: @bibref{Saiu 2011}}

@menu
* API comparison::           How this collector is used, compared to Boehm's.
* Performance comparison::   How this collector performs compared to Boehm's.
@end menu

@c @@@@@
@node API comparison
@subsubsection API comparison

Let @code{o1}, @code{o2} and @code{o3} be registered roots,
and @code{N} some positive integer.
@fixme{@code{range} @code{append}}

@fixme{Wrong (unregistered roots)}
@smallexample
  o1 = append (range (0, N), range (0, N));
  print (o1);
@end smallexample

@fixme{Correct}
@smallexample
  o2 = range (0, N);
  o3 = range (0, N);
  o1 = append (o2, o3);
  print (o1);
@end smallexample

@fixme{Also correct, but slightly more subtle}
@smallexample
  o2 = range (0, N);
  o1 = append (o2, range (0, N));
  print (o1);
@end smallexample

@fixme{Equally correct}
@smallexample
  o2 = range (0, N);
  o1 = append (range (0, N), o2);
  print (o1);
@end smallexample

@fixme{Another subtly incorrect example.  The variable @code{v}
holds a vector boxed object as a tagged value, and is a root.}
@smallexample
  vector_set (v, i, cons_make (EOL, vector_ref (v, i)));
@end smallexample
@fixme{The apparently harmless call @code{vector_ref (v, i)} accesses
the vector @code{v} and returns its @code{i}-th element, without
performing any heap allocation; the problem is that the @emph{result}
of the function call is a heap object, which may be moved if
@code{cons_make} performs a collection; if the vector element
contained some pointer to an alive object, such as @code{v} itself,
that pointer would become invalid, and a root would be lost.  The
following variant is correct, with @code{tmp} being a root:}
@smallexample
  tmp = cons_make (EOL, vector_ref (v, i));
  vector_set (v, i, tmp);
@end smallexample
@fixme{As long as @code{cons} is defined correctly, which implies
temporarily registering both of its arguments as roots, there is no
need to use another variable for @code{vector_ref (v, i)}.}


@c @@@@@
@node Performance comparison
@subsubsection Performance comparison

@fixme{A collector performance is only important when the allocation
rate is high.  An application rarely allocating on the garbage
collected heap will only see negligible differences in performance
from one garbage collector to another.}

@fixme{allocating from VM code can be made extremely fast by inlining
fast-path code (@pxref{Heap allocation from VMs}): here this collector
should win by a wide margin.}

@fixme{It is possible to design some important boxed shapes to require
no headers.  This tight representation of objects will improve
locality and, along with compaction, possibly mitigate the cache
disruption caused by copying.}

@fixme{Temporary root registration, while well optimised, still has an
impact on performance in @emph{deeply recursive} C code where each
function needs to register a few roots, call itself, and deregister at
the end.  Bohem's collector has no similar work to do for registering
and deregistering a temporary root, as it just scans the entire C stack
at collection time.  This problem does not exist in recursive VM code
where the stack is scanned via a hook @pxref{garbage-collector-hooks}.}

@fixme{A moving collector performs well when the survival ratio is
low.  Mark-sweep is less sensitive to this issue and its performance
degrades less drastically as the heap becomes almost full.
Generational collection, as implemented in this collector, may
attenuate or possibly even reverse this disadvantage --- I have not
taken measurements yet.}

@fixme{From preliminary tests object finalisation
(@pxref{Defining finalisable shapes})
in Jitter's garbage
collector appears to be extremely fast, much better than in Boehm's
collector; this will be relevant with some applications but not with
others.}

@fixme{``Sharing'' is slow in Jitter's collector in some circumstances:
explain shy}


@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Garbage collector API
@section Garbage collector API

@menu
* Debugging garbage collection::    The API can help you to catch mistakes.
* Defining shapes::                 Telling the garbage collector what your objects look like.
* Garbage collector initialisation and finalisation::  You need to call functions at the beginning and at the end.
* Root registration::               You need to tell the collector where to find objects.
* Heap allocation from C::          You can make new heap objects from C functions.
* Write barriers::                  Updating existing heap objects require a special primitive.
* Promotion and sharing::           An object used by multiple threads must be in the old generation.
* Garbage collector tuning::        You can set parameters to improve collection performance.
* Other garbage collection operations::  Explicit garbage collection and the like.
@end menu

@c @@@@@@@@@@@
@node Debugging garbage collection
@subsection Debugging garbage collection

@cindex @code{JITTER_GC_DEBUG}
@cindex @code{JITTER_GC_LOG}
@cindex logging, garbage collector
@cindex garbage collector logging
@cindex logging, garbage collector
@cindex garbage collector debugging
@fixme{@code{JITTER_GC_DEBUG} @code{JITTER_GC_LOG}}
@fixme{@code{JITTER_GC_DEBUG} checks for problems in user code, as well as for internal
collector bugs and problems that may mimic internal collector bugs, by violating
invariants.  We believe that the very defensive checks enabled in this mode will
help when debugging garbage collector problems, notoriously difficult to track.
In debugging mode the garbage collector performance will suffer a hit, but
not to the point of making the system unusable; in typical cases the speedup should
range around @math{0.3} to @math{0.7}.}
@c @@@@@@@@@@@
@node Defining shapes
@subsection Defining shapes

A user needs to define the shape of heap objects before being
able to initialise a garbage-collected heap.
@xref{Data representation and tagging} for a description of the
design of shapes and practical suggestions.

@fixme{alignment, headers, type codes and @code{struct}s.  Beware of
the size of every allocated object, which must be a multiple of
@code{JITTER_GC_MINIMUM_OBJECT_SIZE_IN_BYTES} in bytes also counting
the header and any internal or final padding.  There are macros
helping @fixme{Follow the definitions for cons and vector in
@file{jitter-gc-test.c}, which do the right thing.}}

@menu
* Defining headerless shapes::  Some objects can be tightly packed.
* Defining headered shapes::    Some objects require a header.
* Defining finalisable shapes:: You can have a C function called when one of these dies.
@end menu

@c @@@@@
@node Defining headerless shapes
@subsubsection Defining headerless shapes

@c @@@@@
@node Defining headered shapes
@subsubsection Defining headered shapes

@c @@@@@
@node Defining finalisable shapes
@subsubsection Defining finalisable shapes

@anchor{gc-object-finalisation}
@fixme{gc object finsalisation}

@c @@@@@@@@@@@
@node Garbage collector initialisation and finalisation
@subsection Garbage collector initialisation and finalisation

@fixme{This has nothing to do with object finalisation for
finalisable shapes: @pxref{gc-object-finalisation}}

@c @@@@@@@@@@@
@node Root registration
@subsection Root registration

@anchor{registering-roots-more-than-once}
@fixme{Do not register roots more than once.  It leads to disasters,
only reliably detected with @code{JITTER_GC_DEBUG}.
It is of course possible to register multiple roots, each residing
at a different memory address, pointing to the same heap object.
Each root must be unique in the sense of @emph{not residing at the
same address} as any other root.}

@menu
* Global roots::             Some roots remain valid until you explicitly remove them.
* Temporary roots::          You can quickly add and remove roots in LIFO order.
* Garbage collection hooks:: You can register roots on the fly in pre-collection hooks.
@end menu

@c @@@@@
@node Global roots
@subsubsection Global roots

@fixme{I should rename these: ``global'' roots are in fact per-heaplet, even if
they have an undetermined life time.}

@c @@@@@
@node Temporary roots
@subsubsection Temporary roots

@c @@@@@
@node Garbage collection hooks
@subsubsection Garbage collection hooks

@anchor{garbage-collector-hooks}
@fixme{pre- and post-collection hooks}

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Heap allocation from C
@subsection Heap allocation from C

@fixme{These should be used when allocating:
@code{JITTER_GC_HEADERLESS_SIZE_IN_BYTES}
@code{JITTER_GC_HEADERED_SIZE_IN_BYTES}
@code{JITTER_GC_PAD_HEADERLESS_OBJECT}
@fixme{If I end up actually defining this: @code{JITTER_GC_ALLOCATE_AND_PAD_HEADERLESS}}
}

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Write barriers
@subsection Write barriers

@fixme{The write barrier registers the stored addresses in the old
generation which may point to young boxed objects.}

@fixme{It is possible to avoid the overhead of the write barrier when
writing to a boxed object field in two situations:}
@itemize @bullet
@item
the object being written into is definitely young
@item
the object being written is definitely unboxed
@end itemize
@fixme{In practice the first case only applies at object initialisation time:
still, this is an important optimisation: @emph{initialising writes}
do not need the write barrier, since they are guaranteed to happen
between object allocation and the next collection --- collecting when
some object is still not completely initialised is invalid and leads
to disasters.}

@fixme{The write barrier @emph{must not} be used for updating roots:
it is only for updating fields of heap objects.  Applying the write
barrier to a non-heap objects such as a root is equivalent to
registering roots more than once
(@pxref{registering-roots-more-than-once}).}

@smallexample
/* FIXME: comment well. ///////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
   The result is the new allocation limit.  

   Notice that, differently from garbage collecting functions, this function
   gives no guarantee about how much space is freed in the queue; there might
   simply be no place left.  This function will flush the queue and register
   the given pointer, but the next enqueue attempt might fail again.

   Still it should be noticed that, differently from the case of
   jitter_gc_collect_0, this function does in fact guarantee that the requested
   operation succeeds: only *the next* attempt may fail.  This has implications
   over VM code: after jumping to the slow path of the write barrier, control
   should return *past* the attempt: that one write barrier succeeded.
   Compare with allocation from VM code, where the slow path has to jump back
   to the fast path to try again after an allocation failed  [FIXME: is that true for allocation?]. */
jitter_gc_heap_pointer
jitter_gc_write_barrier_queue_flush_1 (struct jitter_gc_heaplet *a,
                                      jitter_gc_heap_pointer allocation_limit,
                                      jitter_gc_tagged_object *pointer)
  __attribute__ ((nonnull (1), nonnull (2), nonnull (3),
                  returns_nonnull, warn_unused_result));
@end smallexample

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Promotion and sharing
@subsection Promotion and sharing

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Garbage collector tuning
@subsection Garbage collector tuning

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Other garbage collection operations
@subsection Other garbage collection operations

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Heap allocation from VMs
@section Heap allocation from VMs

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node GC and threads
@section GC and threads

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Not yet implemented features
@section Not yet implemented features


@c Performance part
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@part Part III@* Performance


@c Writing code generators
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@node Writing code generators
@chapter Writing code generators

@cindex code generator
@cindex generator, code

@menu
* Code generation tips::       Suggestions about how to organize your generator and VM.
* Stack code generation::      Generating code for a stack VM is trivial.
* Register code generation::   Generating code for register VMs can still be easy.
* Specific language features:: Suggestions for how to compile some language forms.
* Specific runtime features::  Suggestions for how to handle runtime features.
@end menu

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Code generation tips
@section Code generation tips

@fixme{two stacks}

@fixme{compile the uncommon or error path out of line}

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Stack code generation
@section Stack code generation

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Register code generation
@section Register code generation

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Specific language features
@section Specific language features

@menu
* Primitive operations::                 Make primitives, even if inefficient, easy to add.
* Conditionals and Boolean expressions:: Avoid materializing Booleans for conditionals.
* Procedural abstraction::               Compiling procedures, functions, or methods.
* Dynamic tag checking::                 Checking for types at run time (or fail).
* Closures::                             Accessing variables from outer scopes.
* Late binding::                         Choosing what to execute based on run-time types.
@end menu

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Primitive operations
@subsection Primitive operations

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Conditionals and Boolean expressions
@subsection Conditionals and Boolean expressions

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Procedural abstraction
@subsection Procedural abstraction

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Dynamic tag checking
@subsection Dynamic tag checking

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Closures
@subsection Closures

@fixme{Closures with known code}

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Late binding
@subsection Late binding

@fixme{Sometimes called dynamic dispatch, but nothing to do with VM dispatches}


@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Specific runtime features
@section Specific runtime features

@menu
* Multi-threading::                      You can run VM code from multiple threads.
* Asynchronous notifications::           Sending messages from a VM thread to another.
* Signals::                              Using signals to interrupt VM code.
@end menu

@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Multi-threading
@subsection Multi-threading

@menu
* Reentrancy issues::                   A few operations require critical sections.
* Iterating on VM states::              You will need to walk the list of states.
@end menu

@c @@@
@node Reentrancy issues
@subsubsection Reentrancy issues


@c @@@
@node Iterating on VM states
@subsubsection Iterating on VM states

If this is not documented anywhere explain @code{vmprefix_states} and the
state doubly-linked list.

@smallexample
static void
handle_signal (int signal_number)
@{
  struct vmprefix_state *s;
  for (s = vmprefix_states->first; s != NULL; s = s->links.next)
    @{
      VMPREFIX_STATE_AND_SIGNAL_TO_PENDING_SIGNAL_NOTIFICATION (s, signal_number) = true;
      VMPREFIX_STATE_TO_PENDING_NOTIFICATIONS (s) = true;
    @}
@}
@end smallexample

Notice that @code{vmprefix_states} is also safe to use from VM
instructions: it is automatically wrapped as a global.

A pointer to the current state is accessible from VM instruction
code as @code{VMPREFIX_OWN_STATE}.  It can be used for pointer comparisons when
iterating over all states, and can be useful for a thread notifying every state
except its own.

@smallexample
#if defined (JITTER_HAVE_SIGACTION)
  struct sigaction action;
  sigaction (SIGINT, NULL, & action);
  action.sa_handler = handle_signal;
  sigaction (SIGINT, & action, NULL);
#else
  signal (SIGINT, handle_signal);
#endif /* #if defined (JITTER_HAVE_SIGACTION) */
@end smallexample

@code{VMPREFIX_FOR_EACH_STATE}.

@smallexample
struct vmprefix_state *s;
VMPREFIX_FOR_EACH_STATE (s)
  if (s != VMPREFIX_OWN_STATE)
    printf ("This is a state different from %p: %p\n", VMPREFIX_OWN_STATE, s);
@end smallexample


@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Asynchronous notifications
@subsection Asynchronous notifications

@menu
* Notification polling and safe points:: Checking for incoming messages must be fast.
* Blocking primitives::                  Some primitives can be interrupted.
@end menu

@c @@@
@node Notification polling and safe points
@subsubsection Notification polling and safe points

To send: @code{VMPREFIX_STATE_TO_SPECIAL_PURPOSE_STATE_DATA}
@code{VMPREFIX_STATE_TO_PENDING_NOTIFICATIONS}

To receive/handle: @code{JITTER_PENDING_NOTIFICATIONS}

@c @@@
@node Blocking primitives
@subsubsection Blocking primitives


@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Signals
@subsection Signals

@code{struct jitter_signal_notification}
@code{pending}
@code{user_data}

@code{signal.h} @code{NSIG}

To send: @code{VMPREFIX_STATE_AND_SIGNAL_TO_PENDING_SIGNAL_NOTIFICATION(statep, signal)}

To receive/handle: @code{JITTER_PENDING_SIGNAL_NOTIFICATION(signal_id)}
@code{JITTER_SIGNAL_NO}

@c Internals
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@node Internals
@chapter Internals

@menu
* Status::                        What is mature and what will change.
* Internals overview::            An quick look at the sources.
* Specialization internals::      Making choices at compile time is better than at run time.
* Patch-ins::                     Patching assembly into copies of compiled C code.
* Rewriting internals::           How rewriting works.
* Dispatch models::               How code jumps from one VM instruction to the next.
* Defective VM instructions::     Automatically working around some unreplicatable code.
* The Jitter build system::       The way Jitter is compiled.
* Architecture-specific notes::   Details on how Jittery VMs work on each supported CPU.
* Porting::                       Adding support for more CPU architectures.
@end menu

@c @@@@
@node Status
@section Status

@fixme{Still in heavy development.  At some point Jitter will be
feature-complete and I expect to maintain it by only fixing bugs
and porting to new platforms.  Even before that point it will be
reasonable to expect some degree of backward compatibility, and
I may make vague promises.  Not yet: everything can still change
radically at any time.}

@fixme{A couple of things could be cleaner and would benefit from a
rewrite.  Others are good.  A few are beautiful.  I should make a
pass on every comment and update them: the vision of the project has
widened since its inception, and the oldest comments certainly do not
keep into account the current architecture.  A good portion of the
runtime support for VMs was written when the C code generator was
still a shell script using @command{csplit} to isolate instruction
code from one another in the input file.}

@fixme{Documentation will be added as features mature.}

@c @@@@@@@
@node Internals overview
@section Internals overview
@cindex internals overview
@cindex overview, internals

@fixme{Jitter provides a friendly API usable even by motivated
beginners, but its internals are @emph{complex}.  Multiple layers of
CPP macros, despite the limitations of the tool.  C and Gas macros
used together in the same assembly source file.  Code generation.
M4sh.  Build system hacks in order to support sub-package mode.  I
hardly regret any of this complexity, which is necessary and not
accidental.  Some factoring would be possible between library code
in @code{jitterc} instruction representation and runtime
@code{libjitter} instruction representation.}


@menu
* Program naming conventions::    Finding your way among C files and programs.
* Code conventions::              Understanding how the sources are written.
@end menu

@c @@@@
@node Program naming conventions
@subsection Program naming conventions
@cindex naming conventions, internals, programs

@fixme{The @command{jitter} C-code-generating program uses the
namespace @code{jitterc} in its C source code and in the build system.
This is to distinguish it from user code linked to a Jittery VM, which
requires a @code{jitter} (no @code{c}) library, differently from the
generator.  The distinction is immaterial to the user.}

@c @@@@
@node Code conventions
@subsection Code conventions

The sources follow the GNU Coding Standards
(@pxref{Top,,, standards, GNU Coding Standards}).

@fixme{Every identifier whose name begins with an underscore character
@code{_} is reserved for internal use.  Macros with a name ending in
@code{_} do not expand to a single C statement; the expansion may
contain automatic variable declarations to be used in the following
statements, or possibly as part of a @code{struct} definition.}

@fixme{order of arguments: container before contained; in macros, struct names first}

@fixme{initialize/finalize vs make/destroy}

@fixme{long literal strings spanning multiple lines, where space permits, are
separated at word boundaries, with a space at the @emph{end} of a line.}

@fixme{abstract data type and information hiding; performance: the critical
code must be fast}

@fixme{[When this manual will be finished: I cannot declare this in
good faith now:] Every identifier not explicitly documented in this
book is not intended for the user, and is subject to change in an
incompatible way}

@fixme{Booleans and @code{bool} / @code{_Bool}.  Why I always write
``non-false'' instead of ``true''.}

@fixme{iff}

@fixme{We say ``speedup'' even when a variant of the code, or some
alternative, or some particular mode, makes the program run
@emph{slower}: a speedup less than @math{1} is effectively a
slowdown.}

@fixme{whitespace before punctuation}

@c @@@@@@@
@node Specialization internals
@section Specialization internals
@cindex specialization
@anchor{specialization}

@c @@@@@@@
@node Patch-ins
@section Patch-ins
@cindex patch-in
@anchor{patch-ins}

@c @@@@@@@
@node Rewriting internals
@section Rewriting internals
@cindex rewriting

@c @@@@@@@
@node Dispatch models
@section Dispatch models
@cindex dispatch

@c @@@@@@@
@node Defective VM instructions
@section Defective VM instructions
@cindex defective, VM instruction
@cindex VM instruction, defect
@cindex instruction, VM, defect

@c @@@@@@@
@node The Jitter build system
@section The Jitter build system
@cindex build system, Jitter

@fixme{@code{configure.ac} is complex but mostly standard.  The
Autoconf macros intended for user configure scripts such as
@code{AC_JITTER} and @code{AC_JITTER_SUBPACKAGE} are defined in
@file{autoconf/jitter.m4}.}

@fixme{The header file @file{jitter/jitter-config.h}, generated by at
configure time, is installed.  @fixme{explain why.} It defines CPP macros with the prefix
@code{JITTER_} intended not to conflict with user identifiers.  Such
macros are used by generated VM code to be compiled without access to
the Jitter source directory, and can be used in user code as well.
The Autoconf macro @code{jitter_define_prefixed_feature_macro},
defined in @file{configure.ac}, is useful to define new CPP macros with
the @code{JITTER_} prefix from other existing macros.}

@fixme{Single @file{Makefile.am}, in the style of @ref{An Alternative
Approach to Subdirectories,,,automake,The Automake manual}.}

@fixme{Most of the complexity in @file{Makefile.am} comes from the
need of compiling the Jitter examples are compiled in non-standard
way, relying on a non-installed non-subpackage Jitter.  In this sense
Jitter's @file{Makefile.am} does not provide a particularly useful
example for a user simply wishing to include a Jittery VM in her own
project; for this use case we recommend looking at the build systems
within @file{example-build-systems/}, which are also considerably
simpler.}

@c @@@
@subsection @code{switch} dispatching
@cindex @code{switch} dispatching
@cindex dispatching, @code{switch}
@c @cindex ``threading'', @code{switch} @c This starts with "`" and looks ugly in the index.
@cindex dispatch
@cindex GCC
@cindex GNU C
@cindex ANSI C
@cindex C, ANSI
@cindex C, Standard
@cindex @code{switch}

@fixme{slow: terrible branch target prediction, range check difficult to eliminate
in practice @fixme{but I think a recent GCC version has made progress: check}}

@c @@@
@subsection Direct threading
@cindex direct threading
@cindex threading, direct
@cindex dispatch
@cindex GCC
@cindex GNU C
@cindex computed @code{goto}
@cindex indirection, double
@cindex memory indirection, double
@cindex jump, doubly indirect

@c @@@
@subsection Minimal threading
@cindex minimal threading
@cindex threading, minimal
@cindex dispatch
@cindex replication
@cindex GCC
@cindex GNU C
@cindex JIT
@cindex computed @code{goto}
@cindex indirection, double
@cindex memory indirection, double
@cindex jump, doubly indirect
@anchor{replication}

@c @@@
@subsection No threading
@cindex threading, no
@cindex no threading
@cindex dispatch
@cindex replication
@cindex GCC
@cindex GNU C
@cindex inline assembly
@cindex assembly, inline @code{asm}
@cindex JIT
@cindex computed @code{goto}
@cindex jump

@subsubsection Fast labels
@cindex fast label
@cindex label, fast
@cindex fast branch
@cindex branch, fast
@anchor{fast-branch-implementation}

@c @@@@@@@
@node Architecture-specific notes
@section Architecture-specific notes
@cindex port, jitter
@cindex architecture
@cindex machine, physical
@cindex CPU
@anchor{ports}
@anchor{architecture-specific}
@fixme{I @emph{do} have opinions about ISAs and about
micro-architectures as well, but they are off-topic right now.}

@fixme{Cross-toolchains are important for support, as are good
single-process emulators such as qemu-user; whole-machine emulators and
physical hardware, while useful, are much less convenient.  If support
is lacking for an architecture, my lack of convenient access to such
tools is probably the reason.  If you have practical suggestions about
this (not requiring non-free software), please contact me.}

@cindex register renaming
@cindex register-starved architecture
@cindex starvation, register-
@cindex register-impoverished
@cindex x86
@cindex rationalization
@fixme{Sixteen registers are not enough for compiled code, not to
speak of Jitter.  I've heard more than once the absurd argument that
register renaming (at the micro-architecture level, invisible to
assembly) would be a solution to this problem.  Of course that is not
the case: register renaming breaks some dependency chains by mapping
different uses of the same architectural @emph{register} to different
micro-architectural registers; but if the ISA is register-starved then
some data in the routine will be kept @emph{in memory} rather than in
architectural registers---at which point register renaming cannot
help.  As simple ignorance of one micro-architectural feature this
mistake would be easy to forgive; but is it ignorance, or x86
rationalization?}

@*
@fixme{This is out of date.  So as not to scare people with this
warning, let it be clear that @emph{more} systems are tested and
supported now.}
@fixme{explain how to read the table}
@fixme{As of late 2021 very out of date: the situation is now much
better than this!}
@multitable @columnfractions .55 .15 .3
@headitem Triplet @tab Works @tab Best dispatch
@c @c --
@c @item @code{?-unknown-linux-gnu}, @code{qemu-user}
@c @tab  ?.?.?
@c @tab  @code{}
@c --
@item @code{aarch64-unknown-linux-gnu}, @code{qemu-user}
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{minimal-threading}
@c --
@item @code{alphaev4-unknown-linux-gnu}, @code{qemu-user}
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{minimal-threading}
@c --
@item @code{arm-unknown-linux-gnueabi}, BeagleBone Black
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{minimal-threading}
@c --
@item @code{arm-unknown-linux-gnueabi}, @code{qemu-user}
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{minimal-threading}
@c --
@item @code{avr}
@tab  no@footnote{I should not unconditionally rely on @code{mmap} on small embedded systems
where all the memory is executable.  I should also learn how to use an AVR emulator.}
@tab  -
@c --
@item @code{avr-unknown-elf}
@tab  no@footnote{I enabled the newlib C library from the crosstool-ng configuration, but I see no C library at all---this might be my fault; obviously the compiler cannot build executables.  In any case the Jitter runtime currently relies on @code{mmap}, so this configuration has no hope of working without changes.}
@tab  -
@c --
@item @code{i586-unknown-linux-gnu}, K6 200MHz
@tab  probably@footnote{I have to replace an IDE cable and test.  Old unreliable hardware.}
@tab  @code{minimal-threading}
@c --
@item @code{i586-unknown-linux-gnu}, @code{qemu-user}
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{minimal-threading}
@c --
@item @code{i586-w64-mingw32}, Wine
@tab  untested@footnote{I don't feel like polluting my computer with all the dependencies for the 32-bit version of Wine.  The platform is very low-priority.}
@tab  ?
@c --
@item @code{m68k-unknown-uclinux-uclibc}
@tab  untested@footnote{Testing the m68k architecture is extremely inconvenient for me: @code{qemu-user} is not usable for m68k, and crosstool only supports @code{nommu} kernels for m68k, and doesn't offer glibc as a choice; I should install a GNU/Linux distribution on a virtual machine, then use either a native compiler on the virtual machine or build a cross-toolchain by hand.  It can be done, but it will be annoying.}
@tab  ?
@c --
@item @code{mips-unknown-linux-gnu}, @code{qemu-user}
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{no-threading}
@c --
@item @code{mips64-unknown-linux-gnu}, @code{qemu-user}
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{minimal-threading}
@c --
@item @code{mips64el-unknown-linux-gnu}, @code{qemu-user}
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{minimal-threading}
@c --
@item @code{mipsel-unknown-linux-gnu}, Lemote YeeLoong
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{no-threading}
@c --
@item @code{mipsel-unknown-linux-uclibc}, Ben NanoNote
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{no-threading}
@c --
@item @code{mipsel-unknown-linux-uclibc}, @code{qemu-user}
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{no-threading}
@c --
@item @code{powerpc-unknown-linux-gnu}, 750 600MHz
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{no-threading}
@c --
@item @code{powerpc-unknown-linux-gnu}, @code{qemu-user}
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{no-threading}
@c --
@item @code{powerpc64-unknown-linux-gnu}, @code{qemu-user}
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{minimal-threading}
@c --
@item @code{powerpc64le-unknown-linux-gnu}, @code{qemu-user}
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{minimal-threading}
@c --
@item @code{powerpcle-unknown-linux-gnu}, ?@footnote{QEmu seems to support little-endian PowerPC only in 64-bit mode.}
@tab  probably
@tab  probably @code{no-threading}
@c --
@item @code{riscv32-unknown-linux-gnu}
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{minimal-threading}
@c --
@item @code{riscv64-unknown-linux-gnu}
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{minimal-threading}
@c --
@item @code{s390-ibm-linux-gnu}, ?@footnote{I can't convince @command{qemu-s390x} to recognize as valid the executables generated by my cross-toolchain; I guess it only supports 64-bit executables.}
@tab  untested
@tab  ?
@c --
@item @code{s390x-ibm-linux-gnu}
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{minimal-threading}
@c --
@item @code{sh4-unknown-linux-gnu}, @code{qemu-user}
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{direct-threading}
@c --
@item @code{sh4eb-unknown-linux-gnu}, @code{qemu-user}
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{direct-threading}
@c --
@item @code{sparc-unknown-linux-gnu}, @code{qemu-user}
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{minimal-threading}
@c --
@item @code{sparc64-unknown-linux-gnu}, @code{qemu-user}
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{minimal-threading}
@c --
@item @code{x86_64-w64-mingw32}, Wine
@tab  probably@footnote{The test suite programs currently fail cross-compiling for Wine, I guess because of a problem with the stupid file extensions.  However I can generate the direct-threaded interpreter, which appears to work correctly.}
@tab  @code{direct-threading}
@c --
@item @code{x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu}, i7-4700MQ
@tab  yes
@tab  @code{no-threading}
@end multitable


@menu
* Aarch64::         The 64-bit variant of ARM.
* Alpha::           The Alpha architecture.
* ARM::             The ARM 32-bit architecture.
* AVR::             The AVR micro-controllers used in Arduino boards.
* i386::            The i386 (or x86) CPUs, running in 32-bit protected mode.
* m68k::            The 68000 CPU and its successors.
* MIPS::            The MIPS architecture.
* OpenRISC::        The OpenRISC architecture.
* PowerPC::         The PowerPC and POWER architectures.
* RISC-V::          The RISC-V architecture.
* s390::            The s390 architecture.
* SH::              The SH architecture and j-core.
* SPARC::           The SPARC architecture.
* x86_64::          The x86_64 CPU, running in long mode.
@end menu


@c @@@
@node Aarch64
@subsection Aarch64
@cindex Aarch64
Minimal-threading works, as long as the GCC builtin for icache
invalidation is sufficient---I have no real hardware to test on and
QEmu does not emulate caches.

At some point I should implement no-threading as well, since the
architecture is popular.

@c @@@
@node Alpha
@subsection Alpha
@cindex Alpha
Minimal-threading works, as long as the GCC builtin for icache
invalidation is sufficient.

No-threading support for Alpha should be considered a low-priority
task, unless some effort emerges to resurrect the ISA in a free
hardware implementation; still one of these days I might do it, just
for the pleasure of working with such a pretty architecture.

@c @@@
@node ARM
@subsection ARM
@cindex ARM (32-bit)
Minimal-threading works.  At some point I should implement
no-threading as well, since the architecture is popular.

@c @@@
@node AVR
@subsection AVR
@cindex AVR
The AVR architecture is currently not supported, but the idea of
running on a small embedded CPU with no operating system feels
intriguing as an intellectual exercise.

I might be able to make simple VMs, probably only with simple
threading models, run on mid-range models.  The most powerful models
addressing a 16MiB data RAM will work easily.

AVR is not supported by QEmu, but there are other free software
emulators; I have to learn how to use them.  I have cross compilers.

@c @@@
@node i386
@subsection i386
@cindex i386
@cindex x86 (32-bit)
Minimal-threading works.

At some point I should implement no-threading as well.  The best route
seems to be generalizing the x86_64 version with CPP conditionals.

@c @@@
@node m68k
@subsection m68k
@cindex m68k
@cindex 68000
Even without having ever tested a complete program I am quite
confident that minimal-threading works already, as long as the GCC
builtin for icache invalidation is sufficient.  PC-relative addressing
can be completely disabled with a GCC command-line option, and I see
no other problems.

Looking at the generated assembly code, and differently from what I
was expecting, I see no big issue with the architecture having
separate register classes for pointers and integers: GCC can still
keep @code{union jitter_word} objects in registers, and will just
generate the occasional register-to-register move instruction when a
VM register allocated to the ``wrong'' class is being used with
operations for the other.

Along with the i386/x86_64 the m68k is among the few surviving
architecture I know having stack-based instructions for handling
procedures, instead of branch-and-link.  Branch-and-link VM operations
can be supported using the same technique I am using on x86_64, with
the mismatch causing the same kind of inefficiency with procedure
calls.  I anticipate that the problem will be more serious on m68k,
its less aggressive implementations providing fewer opportunities to
hide the added latency with instruction-level parallelism.

Testing the m68k architecture is extremely inconvenient for me:
@code{qemu-user} is not usable for m68k, crosstool only supports
@code{nommu} kernels for m68k and does not offer the GNU libc as a
choice; I should install a GNU/Linux distribution on a virtual
machine, then use either a native compiler on the virtual machine or
build a cross-toolchain by hand.  It can be done, but it will be
annoying.


@c @@@
@node MIPS
@subsection MIPS
@cindex MIPS
No-threading works on 32-bit MIPS with either endianness.
Minimal-threading works on 64-bit MIPS as well, again both big- and
little-endian.

32-bit MIPS is very well supported and has patch-ins for branches,
both unconditional and conditional, and procedures.

I made conditional branches quite efficient despite the slightly
unusual ISA in this respect: MIPS has no conditional flags or separate
compare instruction, and can branch conditionally on either a
two-register equality/inequality comparison or a more general
one-register comparison against zero.  The comparison operation is
part of the conditional branch instruction.  To allow for comparisons
not expressible within the instruction (less, less-or-equal, greater,
greater-than-equal between two registers or one register and and
immediate) MIPS provides a three-operand set-on-less-than instruction,
setting a general register to either zero or nonzero.  The other
possible variants set-on-less-or-equal, set-on-greater and
set-on-greater-or-equal are not provided.

Delay slots are often, even if not always, filled with nops.  I can
write a new pass to be run after replication to fill some delay slots
with the instruction being jumped to, adjusting the target as well.
This would be relatively easy, and cover other cases where the
opportunity is now wasted; the same infrastructure should be reusable
on SH and on SPARC, where ``annulled instructions'' would let me cover
even more cases.

For some reason GCC generates much better code for PowerPC than for
MIPS when register pressure is high, even if the two architectures are
very similar.  I should distill a test case and ask the GCC people.

@cindex branch, MIPS
@cindex patch-in, MIPS
@cindex MIPS, branch
@cindex MIPS, patch-in
@fixme{MIPS branches are slightly unusual, and my solution for
handling them with patch-ins is nice.}

@cindex MIPS release 6
@fixme{MIPS release 6 has some (good) new features, but I can't build
a cross compiler with crosstool-ng.  I should write a script to do it
myself.
Supporting r6-specific instructions would be nice: compact branches,
particularly the two-register conditional ones, are very nice.
Pseudo-direct branches are deprecated, but not yet removed, in r6.
Maybe I should just use @code{b} and @code{bal} instead of @code{j}
and @code{jal}, even if the range is narrower; I already use relative
conditional branches.
It should be possible, and easy, to generate assembly code running on
both r6 and on previous versions, even if the @emph{binary} code is
not compatible; however I can't test without a cross compiler.  I have
no r6 physical hardware.}

@c @@@
@node OpenRISC
@subsection OpenRISC
@cindex OpenRISC
Untested.

@fixme{I can't build a cross compiler with crosstool-ng.  I should
write a script to do it myself.}
As a CPU with free-hardware implementations this architecture should
be high-priority.

@c @@@
@node PowerPC
@subsection PowerPC
@cindex PowerPC
No-threading works on 32-bit PowerPC, with either endianness.
Minimal-threading works on 64-bit PowerPC as well, with either
endianness.

PowerPC is well supported, and has patch-ins for unconditional
branches and procedures; conditional-branch patch-ins will be
added soon.

The port includes some inline assembly code to invalidate the icache,
tested on the PowerPC 750 but almost certainly correct for other
PowerPC models as well.

@cindex POWER
POWER is currently untested; looking at the documentation I see some
differences in the required icache invalidation code; however I can
conditionalize that if I ever decide to support POWER, and keep a
single port for both variants.

I routinely test on an emulated 750 and occasionally on a real one,
but I should try other models as well; if more recent models support
PC-relative loads, which is probably the case, GCC using them might
cause problems.

@c @@@
@node RISC-V
@subsection RISC-V

As a CPU with free-hardware implementations this architecture is
high-priority.  Minimal-threading already works.

@c @@@
@node s390
@subsection s390
@cindex s390 (architecture)
@cindex s390x (architecture)

Minimal-threading works, as long as GCC's icache invalidation builtin
is sufficient.

I routinely test the 64-bit variant s390x, which is well supported by
crosstool-ng and qemu-user.  At this time I can build but not run
``31-bit'' s390 executables; still, I do not anticipate particular
problems.

@c @@@
@node SH
@subsection SH
@cindex SH (architecture)
@cindex j-core
Minimal-threading is currently broken on SH, because of the architectural
limitation on instruction immediate width.  GCC solves the problem by using
PC-relative loads of constants close to the code directly in the @code{text}
section, a perfectly sensible strategy for ordinary C code which is unfortunately
incompatible with our relocated instruction intervals.  Sometimes GCC generates
PC-relative loads even for accessing constant bitmasks or @emph{offsets}
to be used for loading from the stack, when the constants are too wide to
fit in instruction immediates; such cases are unfortunately common in C
functions containing many automatic variables, or function calls.
@*
I need a workaround.

Of course direct threading relies on GNU C only, and therefore works
reliably on SH.

As a CPU with free-hardware implementations this architecture should
be high-priority.  Even if not the easiest ISA to support in Jitter I
find the SH an exceptionally beautiful minimalistic design, already
worth supporting on esthetic merit alone.

@c @@@
@node SPARC
@subsection SPARC
@cindex SPARC

No-threading works well on both 32 and 64-bit SPARCs, as long as the
GCC builtin for icache invalidation is sufficient, which it should be.

There is no support yet for conditionals, but that seems easy to add.
VM procedures use the flat model and never change register windows,
which is probably more efficient and certainly leaves a high number of
general registers available.

@fixme{As a CPU with free-hardware implementations this architecture
should be high-priority; are ASIC implementations actually available?}

@c @@@
@node x86_64
@subsection x86_64
@cindex x86_64

No-threading works well.

x86_64 is very well supported and has patch-ins for branches, both
unconditional and conditional, and procedures.

Compiling the executor with the GCC option @code{-mcmodel=large} is
an easy and reliable way of preventing the compiler from using
@code{%rip}-relative addressing to access data from relocated code:
the trick is that x86_64 can only encode a displacement from
@code{%rip} as a signed 32-bit field, while the large model allows
for wider displacements.

@fixme{explain how the ``main'' procedure implementation works.}
The implementation also contains an alternative working implementation
of procedures not using @code{call} and @code{ret}.  It relies on
using a @code{%rip}-relative @code{leaq} to load the return address
into a register, and then jumping; this alternative implementation is
actually a branch-and-link, but since on my machine it seems slightly
slower than the other solution it is disabled.  See
@code{JITTER_BRANCH_AND_LINK_NO_CALL}.

The irritating asymmetry of the operands allowed in x86_64 comparison
instructions sometimes makes the order of comparisons (for example
@code{JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_LESS_SIGNED (@var{a}, @var{b}, @var{F})}
versus @code{JITTER_BRANCH_FAST_IF_GREATER_SIGNED (@var{b}, @var{a},
@var{F})}) affect performance.  I can, and plan to, use
@code{__builtin_constant_p} to rewrite the conditional when one of the
operands is a known literal, but GCC gives me no way of distinguishing
a memory operand from a register operand.


@c @@@@@@@
@node Porting
@section Porting
@cindex port, Jitter
@cindex porting Jitter
@cindex architecture
@cindex machine, physical
@cindex CPU
Jitter is trivial to port to register-based CPU architectures allowing for
a sufficiently wide addressing space.

@fixme{It should be easy for accumulator- and stack-based
architectures as well, as long as they can address more than 16 bits;
anyway these aren't common.}

@fixme{It is possible to have a minimal port, requiring only assembly
code for a word-sized load to memory and no patch-ins; this way it's
easy to test each individual feature}

@subsection Required files
@cindex @file{machine.h}
@cindex @file{machine-assembly.S}
@cindex @file{machine-c.c}
@cindex @file{Makefile.am}
@cindex @file{configure.ac}


@c This is free software
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@node This is free software
@chapter This is free software

@cindex free software
@cindex GNU General Public License
@cindex license
@cindex software license
@cindex GPL
@cindex warranty (none)
@cindex no warranty

@cindex free documentation
@cindex GNU Free Documentation License
@cindex GFDL
@cindex documentation license
@cindex license, for the documentation

@c FIXME[licensetext]: include the complete license texts if the manual becomes
@c long enough.
@ignore
@appendix GNU General Public License
@include gpl.texi

@c @node GNU Free Documentation License
@c @appendix GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License
@include fdl.texi
@end ignore


@c Bibliography
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@node Bibliography
@unnumbered Bibliography

@ignore
This is really quite crude, but I do not feel like writing a generator
script for a small bibliography.

  Order first by surname, then by year.  
  Title in ``quotes''.
  Publication venue in @emph.

Insert citations like this: @bibref{Gudeman 1993}.

I could systematically use doi, with a Texinfo macro.
@end ignore

@fixme{This should include comments for every entry.}

@fixme{I should thank the GForth people here.}

@c FIXME: uncomment as I cite this.
@ignore
@bibbegin{Cormen et al.@: 2009}
Thomas H.@: Cormen,
Charles E.@: Leiserson,
Ronald L.@: Rivest,
Clifford Stein.
``Introduction to Algorithms'',
3rd edition,
The MIT Press, 2009.
@bibend
@end ignore

@bibbegin{Ertl al.@: 2004}
M.@: Anton Ertl, David Gregg.
``Retargeting JIT compilers by using C-compiler generated executable code'',
in @emph{Parallel Architecture and Compilation Techniques}, 2004.
@doi{10.1.1.67.4231}
@bibend

@bibbegin{Gudeman 1993}
David Gudeman.
``Representing Type Information in Dynamically Typed Languages'',
technical report,
Department of Computer Science, The University of Arizona, 1993.
@doi{10.1.1.39.4394}
@bibend

@bibbegin{Jones et al.@: 2012}
Richard Jones, Antony Hosking, Eliot Moss.
``The Garbage Collection Handbook --- The art of automatic memory management'',
Chapman & Hall, 2012.
@bibend

@c FIXME: uncomment as I cite this.
@c FIXME: shall I cite the combined set of volumes?  It may be less pompous.
@ignore
@bibbegin{Knuth, 2011}
The Art of Computer Programming
Donald E.@: Knuth.
``The Art of Computer Programming, Volumes 1-4A'',
Addison-Wesley, 2011.
@bibend
@end ignore

@c FIXME: uncomment as I cite this.
@ignore
@bibbegin{Knuth, 1997}
Donald E.@: Knuth.
``The Art of Computer Programming, Volume 1: Fundamental Algorithms'',
3rd edition,
Addison-Wesley, 1997.
@bibend
@end ignore

@c FIXME: uncomment as I cite this.
@ignore
@bibbegin{Knuth, 1998}
Donald E.@: Knuth.
``The Art of Computer Programming, Volume 2: Seminumerical Algorithms'',
3rd edition,
Addison-Wesley, 1998.
@bibend
@end ignore

@c FIXME: uncomment as I cite this.
@ignore
@bibbegin{Knuth, 1998}
Donald E.@: Knuth.
``The Art of Computer Programming, Volume 3: Sorting and Searching'',
2nd edition,
Addison-Wesley, 1998.
@bibend
@end ignore

@c FIXME: uncomment as I cite this.
@ignore
@bibbegin{Knuth, 2011}
Donald E.@: Knuth.
``The Art of Computer Programming, Volume 4a: Combinatorial Algorithms Part 1'',
1st edition,
Addison-Wesley, 2011.
@bibend
@end ignore

@bibbegin{Saiu 2011}
Luca Saiu, ``Scalable BIBOP garbage collection for parallel functional
programs on multi-core machines'', draft,
Laboratoire d’Informatique de l’Université Paris Nord, 2011.
Available at @url{http://ageinghacker.net/publications/gc-draft.pdf}.
@*@*
An ultimately unsuccessful attempt by the Author to compete with
Bohem's garbage collector playing by the same rules: mark-sweep,
conservative pointer finding, no safe points.
@*
The resulting code is not substantially faster than Bohem's and also
very complex and fragile, requiring substantial computation in signal
handlers where most of the libc runtime is unusable.
@bibend

@bibbegin{Shi et al.@: 2005}
Yunhe Shi, David Gregg, Andrew Beatty, M.@: Anton Ertl.
``Virtual Machine Showdown: Stack Versus Registers'',
in @emph{VEE ’05: Proceedings of the 1st ACM/USENIX international
conference on Virtual execution environments}, 2005.
Available at @url{https://www.usenix.org/legacy/events%2Fvee05%2Ffull_papers/p153-yunhe.pdf}.
@bibend

@bibbegin{Shi 2007}
Yunhe Shi.
``Virtual machine showdown stack vs.@: registers'',
PhD thesis, University of Dublin, 2007.
@doi{10.1.1.391.1562}
@bibend

@bibbegin{Wilson 1992}
Paul R. Wilson.
``Uniprocessor Garbage Collection Techniques'',
submitted to @emph{ACM Computing Surveys}, 1992.
@doi{10.1.1.39.7380}
@bibend


@c Indices
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@cindex index
@printindex cp


@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@c The actual documentation for the user ends here.
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@


@c Stuff still to be written
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@node Stuff still to be written
@appendix Stuff still to be written

Cross-compiling: configure with
@code{--enable-emulator="$(pwd)/libtool --mode=execute qemu-ppc -r 4.6.7 -L /home/luca/usr-cross/powerpc-unknown-linux-gnu/sysroot"}

Configuring with @code{--disable-shared} will speed up builds.

Why not using Gnulib in generated code.

I should find a good name for this software.  ``@file{vmgen}'', possibly
the best choice, has already been taken by the GForth people for a
project quite different from mine, but with a similar aim.

I should explicitly say that the interpreters I care about use a
@dfn{linear program representation}.  Tree- or graph-based
interpreters are too inefficient to consider seriously.
VM instruction may look like native machine instructions, but don't
have to; the focus is performance, and the right solution depends on
what can be implemented most efficiently in a VM.

Motivation: potentially complex instructions, not a good fit for a
traditional JIT; experimenting with calling conventions.

I resisted the temptation of making the thing Lispy, mostly to get
Jitter more easily acceptable to a wider community---even if I really
hesitated when getting to parsing operators with precedence and
associativity, and almost redid everything the sensible way, using
s-expressions.

On reusing VMs.

Big and small machines.  ``Embededd'', whatever it means.

Is it a JIT?

Not even an attempt at being safe.

Mention Forth and vmgen.  Mention QEmu as well.

``Threaded-code'' has nothing to do with multi-threading and concurrency.

The system is agnostic with respect to binary formats: it does not
rely on ELF @fixme{not really} and does noting unusual at link time.  VMs can be made
into dynamic library.  All the dynamic code patching happens at
runtime, after startup, on code with has been already relocated in the
native architecture and endianness --- some architecture-dependent
part of the code patching is of course sensitive to endianness, but
that can be handled with simple preprocessor conditionals (see for
example MIPS instruction patching in
@file{machine/mips/jitter/machine/jitter-machine-c.c}).  All current assembly code
@emph{does} require the GNU assembler (in particular alternative
macros, subsections and the section stack), and I will almost
certainly rely on its features even more in the future.

The code I care about: compilers, symbolic processing.  If I were
doing, say, graphics, my priorities would be different and I'd have
pursued some paths which I've left open.

A program using a Jitter-generated VM does not need to
know the dispatching model or the number of fast registers: it can be
simply linked to one of several libraries generated for a given VM,
all having a compatible APIs.  No preprocessor feature macros are
needed externally and all such libraries are functionally
interchangeable.

Document how to install the Emacs major mode for Jitter, even if it is
completely standard.

Every dispatching model more sophisticated than
@code{switch}-dispatching relies on GNU C, and freely uses GNU C
extensions: @code{typeof}, computed gotos, nested functions, GCC
builtins, function attributes, empty inline assembly with constraints
to notify the compiler of variables changing value out of its control.
More critically, some distpatching models also rely on non-trivial
assumptions about code generated by GCC, which are subject to breaking
with future GCC versions.  A reasonable effort will be made to keep
jittery code from breaking, but the user is encouraged to always rerun
the Jitter test suite after upgrading GCC.

Very little assembly in the source code; almost all inline asm is
actually platform-independent.

Implementation limits:
@itemize
@item
maximum number of residuals per specialized
instruction equal to the number of bits in a word.  Of course this
could be lifted, but it would be painful and almost certainly useless.
This is because of
@code{vmprefix_specialized_instruction_label_bitmasks}
and
@code{vmprefix_specialized_instruction_fast_label_bitmasks}.

@item
Depending on how I encode fast jump instruction placeholders in
compiled code there will be other limit on the number of residuals,
which however will be higher than the previous limit.  Or maybe I can
store the information away from the placeholder, and keep a pointer
@emph{to} the placeholder, keeping informations along with the
pointer.  Yes, this is the best solution.
@end itemize

@code{!BEGINBASICBLOCK} marks the beginning of a basic block
@emph{at the VM level}.  Within each VM instruction, and from a VM
instruction to the very beginning of the next (which at the VM level
is fall-through control), there may be other jumps; these do not
require special provisions, except making sure that each instruction
is compiled into an uninterrupted interval of native instructions,
without ever referring to addresses out of the interval either for
native instructions or data.

@section (Meta-)language
Shall I replace the phrase ``dispatching model'' with something else?
I use it to describe two different runtime behaviors:
@dfn{dispatching}, in the sense of jumping from one VM instruction to
the next, and @dfn{argument access}.  Maybe I should just say
``runtime''.

About the word ``word'': it does not mean what it means in Gas.

Replication/relocation: GForth's ``dynamic superinstructions with
replication'' corresponds to my @emph{minimal-threading} dispatch
model; my @emph{no-threading} dispatching model is close to what
@command{gforth-fast} did.
Jitter does not support ``dynamic superinstructions without
replication''.

GCC is @emph{not} called at run time; that would be very slow, and the
result would probably be inferior (separately compiled code could not
easy share runtime state such as VM registers, without resorting to
globals in memory).  Gas is @emph{not} called at run time either.  In
fact a Jittery VM doesn't need to invoke any external program to work
except @command{objdump} for disassembling, and even that is only useful
for debugging and developing, and therefore not critical for
performance.  VMs do not rely on @file{ld.so} for loading or relocating
generated code: everything is done in memory, on raw instruction
bytes.  There is no @code{dlopen}.

Jittery VMs might be useful as a tool to experiment with garbage
collectors, since it allows for low-level control; Jitter gives the
user much more control over the generated code compared to a compiler,
and I guess replicated code could count as a reasonable approximation
of compiler-generated code when evaluating the performance of a
collector.  With Jitter it is easy to reserve (VM) registers for
special purposes, and to play with weird stack organizations.

Polemical references to what scripting languages do, to be softened:
if your program spends most of the time accessing complicated
associative data structures you should use external functions for
this---or even better @emph{you should not do it}: arrays were
developed for a reason.  Bignums are nice to have, but should not be
used for @emph{all} numbers.  Having floating-point numbers
@emph{only} is stupid for the same reason.  If you have a radical idea
for a computation model and you want to encode everything in it, make
sure that you can recognize the optimizable cases and reduce them to
the fast version almost always.


@section Frontend performance
@code{mmap}; a lot of @code{malloc} and @code{free} which are
difficult to do without, because of rewriting.  But custom heap
allocators might be a good idea for the future, assuming the common
use case is destroying a routine after it's been specialized, and
keeping only the specialized version; this is currently not possible
as both routine versions are kept in the same data structure, but that
will change.

Even in its current state Jitter's frontend should run much faster
than the alternative of spawning @command{gcc} or even just
@command{as} plus @command{ld} processes, and then using @code{dlopen}
to link object code.

Specialization can possibly be made faster (and the generated code
certainly much smaller) by using simple automata techniques of the
same family of those of Flex---the problem involves building an
automaton for specialized instruction prefixes, which I think I can do
directly in DFA form by using a hash at generation time.  I cannot
really tell how much of a problem specialization performance is at run
time without benchmarking a complete Jittery application.  As for
compile time, specialization is heavyweight but not the bottleneck:
the executor, being essentially one huge function, is more demanding on
the compiler than a large set of small static functions calling each
other.  Switching from the current approach based on custom code
generated for each specialized instruction to a single generated table
accessed by hand-written code would shift the load from the
instruction cache to the data cache.  The table-based alternative
would touch less memory, but possibly with worse spatial locality.

The frontend works in passes: instruction specialization is a separate
pass, working on every unspecialized instruction one after the other.
This is probably good.  Will the specializer code and data remain in
L1i and L1d between a specialization pass and the next?  I doubt it.


@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@section Markup samples for the reference part

@deftypefn {Macro} SWAP @
  (@var{A}, @var{B}) @code{SWAP} assigns the value of @var{A} to
@var{B} and the value of @var{B} to @var{A}.

Both @var{A} and @var{B} must be lvalues.  Each is evaluated exactly
once, in an unspecified order.

The macro expands to a statement, and there is no return value.
@end deftypefn

@c The example can also be put within the deftypefn block.  The output
@c is indented differently.
@example
int a = 10, b = 20;
SWAP(a, b);
printf ("%i, %i\n", a, b);
@print{} 20, 10
@end example

@deftypefn {Library Function} int sum @
  (int @var{q}, float @var{w})
...
@end deftypefn

@deftypevr {Global Variable} bool frobnicate
...
@end deftypevr

@section GCC options
This seems reasonable:
@code{-O2 -fno-gcse -fno-plt -fpic -fpie -fno-crossjumping -fno-reorder-blocks -fno-thread-jumps -fno-jump-tables -fno-tree-switch-conversion}
even if the result is not
satisfactory when fast registers are too many---except on PowerPC,
where the result keeps using registers well; that is surprising as
MIPS should be very similar, but the generated code is much worse.

x86_64: @code{-mcmodel=large} seems to avoid @code{%rip}-relative
addressing altogether in generated code.  This is possibly a
breakthrough, generalizable to other architectures.  Notice that my
hackish way of generating assembly files hides the effect if I
override CFLAGS from the @command{make} command line.

SH: some subset of these options seems to greatly help in generating
better (floating-point) code, even if it's still polluted with @code{fpscr}
modifications and PC-relative loads crashing my replicated code:
@code{-Ofast -funsafe-math-optimizations -ffast-math -fpic -maccumulate-outgoing-args -mprefergot -mnomacsave -mfmovd -ftree-vectorize}
I guess the @code{fpscr} problem would disappear if I built a toolchain
with only one floating-point width.

@section Among design goals
Jitter makes it possible to experiment with compilation techniques:
even runtime features in my opinion too inefficient to use in
production should still be convenient to implement on a VM.  The
development of a runtime system can be made incremental, thanks to the
easily modifiable nature of Jittery VMs.

@section About tracing JITs
They are very fashionable but I'm skeptical about them.  If we are
already translating all the code to an intermediate representation
such as the JVM bytecode or Jitter's unspecialized code we may as well
accept the small additional linear-time overhead of specialization and
compile @emph{everything} to native code.  In a very dynamic
environment where code is rewritten multiple times at run time (like
GNU epsilon does, in some execution phases) old native code can be
garbage collected with finalizers, and its space reused for new
generated code.

I am personally unconvinced about the need for the additional
complexity of tracing.  People who disagree with me can still use
Jitter for generating native code from traces, collected with
mechanisms of their own.

@section VM instruction coarseness, or granularity
It is debatable whether VM instructions should be RISC- or CISC-like.

Native code makes the tradeoffs different from traditional threaded
code, with a RISC design being more feasible, particularly elegant for a
low-level source language and yielding smaller replicated code blocks:
this reduced complexity should make place for increasing the number of
fast VM registers, for better performance.

On the other hand for a very dynamic system a CISC approach might pay
off in dynamic compilation time, reducing the number of VM
instructions to work with in exchange for larger, but fewer, blocks to
copy: this boils down to comparing the performance of @code{memcpy}
against additional VM code generation and specialization, with its
complicated branching and memory access patterns---and @code{memcpy}
is the obvious winner.
Larger VM instructions will also give GCC ampler opportunities to optimize
generating good native instruction schedules, allocating
intra-instruction temporaries in temporary registers, and possibly
unrolling loops.  Composing RISC-like VM instructions cannot yield
native code of the same quality since GCC lacks information about the
interaction between one instruction and the next, and can only work on
each one in isolation.

Whether all of this makes a difference in practice remains to be seen.
If you have numbers to show, I am interested.

@section What a ``basic block'' is
Each ``basic block'' whose entry point is marked by a
@code{!BEGINBASICBLOCK} specialized instructions in some dispatching
models is actually an @dfn{extended basic block} in the sense of a
linear sequence of specialized instructions beginning with its one
@dfn{entry} specialized instruction (any number of predecessors) and
containing one or more @dfn{exit} specialized instructions (any number
of successors, also extended basic blocks) potentially branching out
of the sequence.  An extended basic block may be entered only through
its first specialized instruction, but specialized instructions
exiting the extended basic block may occur at any point within the
block, not necessarily at the end.

A caller specialized instruction, even if conditional. always ends an
extended basic block since returning from the procedure will jump back
to the specialized instruction immediately following it, which
therefore marks the beginning of a different extended basic block.  A
callee specialized instruction is also always at the beginning of an
extended basic block, as it can be a branch target---the difference
between branch and branch-and-link being irrelevant for the purpose of
basic block identification.

The definition above would allow unconditional branches, unconditional
procedure returns or @code{!EXITVM} specialized instructions to always
end a basic block, since the following specialized instruction, if
any, is not reachable through straight-line code and must be a branch
target, if reachable at all.  Jitter does not delimit extended basic
blocks in this way, instead checking (conservatively) which
unspecialized instructions are possible branch @emph{targets}.  This
yields slightly longer extended basic blocks, potentially containing
dead code at the end.  I argue that this is not a problem in practice.
The alternative would be having the user annotate meta-instructions to
identify which ones perform @emph{unconditional} branches; incorrect
annotations would lead to subtle bugs.  Caller meta-instructions
@emph{do} require a user annotation in the form of the @code{caller}
property, for the very purpose of correctly delimiting basic blocks,
without which C macros for branch-and-link are not available to user
code: but in this case the annotation cannot be forgotten if the
meta-instruction code actually contains a branch-and-link operation,
and even a redundant annotation does not yield incorrect code.

I'm not currently using the phrase ``extended basic block'' since I've
seen the same phrase used for slightly different concepts.  This might
change in the future.



@c Stuff still to be implemented.
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@node Stuff still to be implemented
@appendix Stuff still to be implemented

@section Emacs mode
Emacs mode: the empty code block here should be recognized as valid, but it isn't.
@example
state-struct-c
  code
  end
end
@end example

@section @code{mmap}
@code{mmap} code to low addresses where
possible.  By default Linux doesn't allow user processes to
@code{mmap} the the very first page, but using the space from the
second one (usually @code{0x1000} or @code{0x2000}) to @code{0xffff}
can be a big win for slow labels on RISCs with 16-bit-only
immediates and without fast label support---however the set of those
machines is supposed to become very small.

@section Word size on the target machine
Make sure that @command{jitter} doesn't expand BITS_PER_WORD and
similar macros according to the machine where @emph{it} runs; I'm
almost positive it does now.

This is difficult.  Shall I just generate every possibility?  A
heavyweight solution would be generating every possibility separately
in output C code, with @code{#ifdef}s around to only enable the used
part.  This would make the generated code three times as big (even if
not slower to compile) entailing three sets of definitions:
@itemize
@item 16-bit word
--- it costs nothing more at this point;
@item 32-bit word;
@item 64-bit word.
@end itemize
If I do this it is imperative to do it in a non-invasive way, possibly
by having @command{jitter} call itself more than once, collecting and
appending the generated files; this way the code change can be
localized.

@section Non-relocatable instructions
Locally @emph{un}wrap globals and functions.  This is easy and
independent from the rest.

Implement transfer registers, likely in memory, as offsets known at
compile time relative to the @emph{base}.  This is easy.

Second step: generate special specialized instructions (which is to
say, without unspecialized counterparts) to transfer between ordinary
and transfer registers, and to load transfer registers with immediates.

Third step: do not specialize non-relocatable instructions, and insert
transfer instructions around non-relocatable instructions at
specialization time.

@section Machine register use: single @emph{base} [almost done now]
Use a single @emph{base} to point to memory residuals, slow registers and
possibly transfer registers as well.  This is how to organize the
array with multiple data types:
@itemize
@item
first come the residual memory cells, whose number and classes are
known;

@item
then come the transfer registers held in memory, whose number and
classes are again known (shall I overlay transfer registers and memory
residuals?  Any saving would be minimal unless I completely eliminate
one of the two concepts, which will not be feasible with multiple
user-specified data types---it would be feasible now);

@item
then come the slow registers, ordered first by index, then by class:
for example, if there are
three classes @math{A}, @math{B} and @math{C}
and fast registers are
6
(@code{%a0}..@code{%a5},
@code{%b0}..@code{%b5},
@code{%c0}..@code{%c5})
then the slow registers will be, in order,
@code{%a6}, @code{%b6}, @code{%c6},
@code{%a7}, @code{%b7}, @code{%c7},
@code{%a8}, @code{%b8}, @code{%c8}, and so on.
Slow-register residual arguments will be encoded as offsets from the
base: no multiplication needed at run time.
When more slow registers are needed at run time it is easy to grow the
array with @code{realloc}: only the last part changes.
@end itemize
Alignment should be
optimal, possibly by making each field aligned like the
largest-alignment class---this is a simple solution, but it may be
possible to do better.

@subsection Base pointer not at offset zero
The base should not necessarily point to the beginning of this memory
buffer: it can point inside it, at a known offset: this would make
offsets from the base smaller in modulo, giving access to the negative
part as well, which might be important on architectures with only small
immediates (SH, ARM).

@section Alias argument class
Rewriting may make some arguments of the same instruction always equal
to one another; in this case only @emph{one} of them should be
residualized.  This might be important with slow registers, but I
haven't thought much of how to do it.  It's also important to respect
modes: if one alias argument has input mode and another input/output
mode, I @emph{am} allowed to modify the input/output version of it
within the instruction: after all it's the same register.  Hum.  Maybe
it's easier than I think.
@*
It's important that this optimization is automatic: it's not
acceptable to pollute a VM specification with explicit two-argument
versions of meta-instructions, just as rewrite targets.  Jitter should
automatically discover that some arguments are redundant, and
transform the definition.  I guess I will need an ``alias'' argument
class, to be used internally and possibly for the user as well (or
just to make my life easier when debugging).

@subsection Scratch register not reserved
Do not reserve the scratch register: just mark it as clobbered or set
by inline asm in residual-loading code, so that GCC can reuse it as a
temporary.  This would require GCC local register variables, but the
thing is not trivial: residual loading snippets can no longer just be
copied before each instructions, but have to become patch-ins;
otherwise GCC might insert code @emph{around} the local register
variable declaration or inline asm, to save and restore the value
previously held in the scratch register.

This is a lot of work.  An easier compromise might be not to reserve
the scratch register at all, and instead saving and restoring it from
the assembly snippets setting it.

@section Frontend optimization
Optimize the frontend.  In particular, turn checks for impossible
conditions into @code{assert}s, and add a configure option to disable
assertions.  Make fast unsafe versions of instruction-appending
functions, to be used from debugged C code generators -- but not from
the parser, whose input comes from the user.  Measure performance in
generated VM instructions per second or possibly native instructions
per second or bytes per second; on @code{moore} it's currently around
1.7M VM instructions/second, including the parser overhead; I can't
really tell if that's fast, without knowing the numbers for any JITs.

@section Frontend cleanup
Right now the frontend has data structures completely different from
the ones in @command{jitter}.  Much of this distinction is reasonable, but some
encoding, particularly in instruction arguments, could be shared.

@section Memory directives
Let the user specify data along with instructions in symbolic VM
files, and a corresponding C API.

Labels preceding instructions and data will need to be different
because of the difference at specialization time, but it should not be
a limitation to have them be even syntactically distinct.


@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@section Stack slot access
Slow registers mapped to a stack, to make procedure calls easier?  Can
I make that general?  I'd say not.

But it would be easy to provide macros accessing the stack slots of a
given non-TOS-optimized stack as l-values.  In order to be efficient
they would be provided in two versions, working with indices and
offsets.

@section Convenience register spilling
Adding macros to spill and unspill all the fast registers, and all
registers up to a given index, would be easy.

This of course would be convenient for the user but suboptimal, so the
feature would consist in macros to be optionally possibly called in VM
instruction code.

@section A ridiculous i386/x86_64 optimization
Add a different pair of call/prolog macros pushing the return address
to a non-TOS-optimized stack.  This would be implemented with inline
assembly on x86 by an @code{xchg} on the @code{%rsp} and a VM stack
pointer, and on the other side as just an xchg; and in normal C for
every other architectures.

This may or may not be worth the trouble, and anyway should not be the
main calling facility.

@section No-threading: generate one C compilation unit per VM instruction
A wild idea: instead of generating the no-threading ``interpreter'' as
a C file containing one huge function with ~10000 labels, I could
generate ~10000 small C compilation units each containing one
function---one per VM instruction.  In order to guarantee
compatibility when composing compiled code I would have to reserve
registers myself for runtime state data structures: this can be done
with GCC global register variables.  I would lose access to data on
the stack shared by all the instructions, but I could use my base
pointer instead of C's stack pointer, without any loss of efficiency.

Instead of generating ~10000 C files I could generate just one, and
use CPP to disable everything but one function at each compilation.
That would make things a little cleaner.

Pros:
@itemize
@item
almost certainly better code: I get to decide exactly what part of the
runtime state goes into registers.

@item
possibly break my dependency on GCC's @code{-fno-reorder-blocks},
which is very critical right now---even if nobody has talked of
removing that option I'm relying on its behavior, which is not
guaranteed anywhere; in fact I'm surprised that GCC can even generate
assembly code exactly respecting the order in the source;

@item
almost certainly, avoiding implicit reliance on code and data defined
in an instruction block and used by another.  This currently breaks
SH, where GCC uses PC-relative addressing to load constants too large
to fit in immediates, which would be a good (and clever) solution
normally, but a problem for my code-copying technique;

@item
Much less memory required for GCC.
@end itemize

Cons:
@itemize
@item
How do I force GCC not to alter the stack pointer before the beginning
or after the end of the code to be copied?  Can I actually reserve
something like @code{%rsp} with @code{-ffixed-REG}?  The documentation
is not completely clear, but I strongly doubt that.  [In fact, I can't].
Were the QEmu people hit by this problem before they switched to their
new code generator?

I'm pessimistic here.  I can keep a global register variable in
@code{%rsp} and reliably read and write it from C even without inline
asm, but I can't prevent GCC from adjusting the stack whenever it
wants, possibly right before my reads or after my writes.

Until I find a solution, this idea is on hold.  Variations of this
alter @code{%rsp} in places impossible to control:
@smallexample
//register void* rsp asm ("%rsp");
register long a asm ("%rbx");
register long b asm ("%r12");
register long c asm ("%r13");
register void* d asm ("%r14");

extern void *beginning, *end;

void
f (void *label)
@{
  asm volatile ("# Function beginning");
  if (__builtin_expect (label == 0, 0))
    @{
      beginning = && beginning_label;
      end = && end_label;
      return;
    @}
  goto * label;
 beginning_label:
  @{
    asm volatile ("# After beginning");
    a ++;

    volatile long p [3000];
    p [0] = 0;
    p [1] = 1;
    p [2] = 2;

    asm volatile ("# Before end");
  @}
 end_label:
  asm volatile ("# After end");
@}
@end smallexample

@item
A lot of time required for the linker.

I suppose that the GCC part of the compilation would still be
heavyweight in time, even it it would become easy to parallelize.  The
stress would move from the compiler to the linker: can GNU LD
efficiently link 10000 compiled modules, each containing one
non-static function?  That is easy to test;

@item
More total time required for GCC?  I am curious about that;

@item
Nested C functions, as I mean to use them (several functions within
the one interpreter function, called by replicated code from the
interpreter function) would break.  But maybe I can work around that;

@item
Possibly very disruptive in Jitter.

@item
What about non-word-sized elements in the status?  Anyway, anything
not fitting in a register would be accessible in memory base-relative.
Everything would remain thread-local, which is good.
@end itemize


@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
@c Footer.
@c @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

@bye
Local Variables:
  eval: (flyspell-mode t)
  eval: (ispell-change-dictionary "american")
  compile-command: "bash -ci 'make -C ~/repos/jitter/_build/native-gcc-9 info pdf'"
End:
