.\" This is -*- nroff -*-.
.\" Stub man page for Jitter, to be used when help2man is not usable.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2017, 2019, 2021 Luca Saiu
.\"
.\" About this man page:
.\" Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
.\" document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
.\" Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
.\" Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and
.\" no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the
.\" Jitter distribution as COPYING.DOC .
.\"
.\" About Jitter:
.\" Jitter is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\" Jitter is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with Jitter.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.\"
.\" This file is crude.  I have only a very superficial understanding
.\" of nroff.  It should still be adequate for a stub pointing to other.
.\" documentation.
.TH JITTER 1

.SH NAME
Jitter \- an efficient Virtual Machine generator

.SH DESCRIPTION
Alas, there is not much information here.

.SH THIS MAN PAGE IS A STUB
The system on which the source tarball was built lacked the
GNU help2man utility or used cross-compilation without an
emulator available to run the produced file with
\fB\-\-help\fR ;
for these reasons this page is just a placeholder.

Anyway, the actual documentation is in Texinfo.  If your Info system
is well configured and you have installed Jitter then you should be
able to use the command line

\fBinfo\ jitter\fR

to access the full documentation; otherwise, the best way to use the Info
documentation is certainly from GNU Emacs.

The official manual can also be compiled into Info, PostScript, PDF or HTML
from the source distribution via

\fBmake\ info\ ps\ pdf\ html\fR

JitterLisp, an elaborate example of Jitter use, also has its own manual written
in Texinfo, which is built from the same command line above.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Luca Saiu.

.SH COPYRIGHT FOR JITTER
Copyright \(co 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021  Luca Saiu

You may redistribute copies of Jitter under the terms of the GNU General Public
License, version 3 or any later version published by the Free Software
Foundation.  For more information see the file named COPYING in the source
distribution.

.SH COPYRIGHT FOR THIS STUB MAN PAGE
Copyright \(co 2017, 2019 Luca Saiu
Updated in 2021 by Luca Saiu
Written by Luca Saiu

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and
no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the
Jitter distribution as \fBCOPYING.DOC\fR .

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR info(1)\fR,
.BR makeinfo(1)\fR,
.BR texi2any(1)\fR,
the Jitter web page at
.BR http://ageinghacker.net/projects/jitter\fR
